biorxiv
BIORXIV
bioRxiv
bioRxiv
2692-8205
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
BIORXIV/2025/669288
10.1101/2025.08.08.669288
biorxiv;2025.08.08.669288v3
biorxiv;2025.08.08.669288
2025.08.08.669288
2025.08.08.669288
2025.08.08.669288
3.1
Regular Article
New Results
Neuroscience
Inhibiting the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex selectively enhances unsupervised statistical learning
1
INSERM;
2
Eotvos Lorand University;
3
Atlantico Medio University;
4
University of Greenwich;
5
Semmelweis University
*
Corresponding author; email:
pesthy.orsolya@gmail.com
Pesthy
Orsolya
1
6
pesthy.orsolya@gmail.com
Pesthy
Zsuzsanna Viktoria
2
Vekony
Teodora
3
Janacsek
Karolina
4
Fabo
Daniel
5
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9629-5856
Nemeth
Dezso
1
2026
8
8
2025
1
4
2026
8
8
2025
2025.08.08.669288
08
8
2025
01
4
2026
01
4
2026
© 2026, Posted by openRxiv
2026
This pre-print is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), CC BY-NC 4.0, as described at
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
The brain must balance the automatic extraction of environmental regularities with top-down cognitive control, yet the causal neural mechanisms governing this interplay are debated. In particular, the hemispheric contributions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) remain unresolved. Here, we applied inhibitory repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the left, right, or bilateral DLPFC in 95 healthy adults during a probabilistic sequence learning task. We found that inhibiting the right and bilateral DLPFC significantly enhanced statistical learning compared to sham and left DLPFC stimulation. Contrary to the hypothesis that this competition is mediated by the suppression of existing knowledge, episodic memory performance was unaffected across all stimulation groups. These findings challenge a direct episodic gating mechanism and suggest the DLPFC's influence on statistical learning is hemisphere-dependent. As an alternative, we propose that right DLPFC inhibition shifts cognitive processing toward a more exploratory information-sampling strategy, a view supported by our finding of significantly greater reaction time variability in the right and bilateral stimulation groups. Together, our results provide causal evidence for a right-lateralized suppressive influence of the DLPFC on unsupervised learning and suggest its modulatory role is linked to information processing style rather than direct competition with episodic memory systems.
French National Grant Agency
ANR-22-CPJ1-0042-01
ANR-24-CE37-5807
National Brain Research Program
NAP2022-I-2/2022
citation_submitter_name
Orsolya Pesthy
citation_submitter_email
pesthy.orsolya@gmail.com
citation_submitter_id
300545
citation_submitter_institution
INSERM
special-property
contains-inline-supplementary-material
has-earlier-version
yes
Competing Interest Statement
The authors have declared no competing interest.
Summary of Updates:
We improved the method description, added figures, changed the episodic memory task analysis, refined the interpretation of the results.
https://osf.io/e2rzs/?view_only=88125069a7ad418f804374378bacc441
DC1
Supplementary Materials