1 Introduction
1
Introduction
2
NLSD Test for Non-Gaussian Processes
2.1
Linear Serial Dependence in Time Series
2.1.1
Univariate Time Series
2.1.2
Multivariate Time Series
2.2
Nonlinear Serial Dependence in Time Series
3
GCov Specification Test for Semi-Parametric Models
3.1
The Semi-Parametric Model
3.2
The GCov Specification Test
3.3
Asymptotic Properties of the GCov Specification Test
3.3.1
Null Hypothesis and Asymptotic Size
3.3.2
Local Alternatives and Local Power
4
Bootstrap-Adjusted GCov Test
4.1
Bootstrap Under the Null Hypothesis
4.2
Bootstrap Analysis of the Local Power of Test
4.3
An Extended Continuous Updating GMM
5
Increasing the Set of Autocovariance Conditions
5.1
Implicit Null and Alternative Hypotheses
5.2
The Semi-Parametric Efficiency Bound
5.3
How to Choose an Infinite Set of Transformations
5.4
Regularized Orthonormalization of the System of Generators
5.5
Two-step Portmanteau Statistic and its Asymptotic Distribution
6
Finite Sample Performance of NLSD, GCov Specification and Bootstrap Tests
6.1
Simulation Study
6.1.1
Data Generating Process
6.1.2
Nonlinear Transformations
6.1.3
NLSD Test for Time Series
6.1.4
GCov Specification Test for Semi-Parametric Models
6.1.5
Infinite Variance Errors
6.2
GCov Bootstrap Test
6.2.1
GCov Bootstrap Test with GCov Estimator
6.2.2
Parametric Estimation of Causal-Noncausal Models
6.2.3
GCov Test and GCov Bootstrap Test with AML Estimator
6.2.4
Infinite Variance Errors
6.3
GCov Specification Test with Many Transformations
7
Empirical Application
8
Conclusion
GCov-Based Portmanteau Test
Joann Jasiak
*
*
*
York University,
e-mail:
jasiakj@yorku.ca
,
 and Aryan Manafi Neyazi
вҖ 
вҖ 
вҖ 
York University, e-mail:
aryanmn@yorku.ca
This version: November 3, 2025
Abstract
We study nonlinear serial dependence tests based on portmanteau statistics with nonlinear autocovariances for non-Gaussian time series and residuals of dynamic models. A new test with an asymptotic
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution is introduced for testing nonlinear serial dependence (NLSD) in time series. It stems from the Generalized Covariance (GCov) residual-based specification test with an asymptotic
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution for semi-parametric dynamic models with i.i.d. non-Gaussian errors.
We derive new asymptotic results under local alternative hypotheses on the parameters of a dynamic model, and extend the GCov test to an infinite set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions. A GCov bootstrap test is introduced
for size adjustments in finite samples, or residual diagnostics
in models estimated parametrically by a maximum likelihood method.
A simulation study shows that the tests perform well in applications to mixed causal-noncausal autoregressive models. The GCov specification test is used to assess the fit of a mixed causal-noncausal model of aluminum prices with locally explosive patterns, such as bubbles and spikes, between 2005 and 2024.
Keywords:
Semi-Parametric Estimator, Generalized Covariance Estimator, Portmanteau Statistic, Causal-Noncausal Process, Bubbles.
1
Introduction
Diagnostic checking is an important component of the traditional Box-Jenkins procedure for the identification and estimation of stationary linear ARMA models with serially uncorrelated Gaussian errors. It has been routinely conducted by applying the Box-Pierce or Ljung-Box tests to the residuals of an ARMA model to detect serial correlation. Analogously, the diagnostic checking of nonlinear ARCH-type models is often conducted by applying the Box-Pierce or Ljung-Box test twice to the residuals and their squares.
Recently, there has been a growing interest in dynamic models with independent, identically distributed (i.i.d.) non-Gaussian errors, such as the structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) models for macro-economic data, and the mixed causal-noncausal autoregressive (MAR), vector autoregressive (VAR) and double autoregressive (DAR) models for processes with local explosive features, such as spikes and bubbles, displayed by the commodity and cryptocurrency price processes, for example. Diagnostic checking in these models is commonly based on the Ljung Box tests applied to the residuals, their squares, and potentially higher powers, which is a cumbersome multi-step procedure.
This paper reviews
convenient one-step diagnostic procedures for jointly testing various forms of nonlinear serial dependence in non-Gaussian time series before estimation, as well as in the residuals ex-post, as a specification test for dynamic models with i.i.d. non-Gaussian errors.
We introduce a new (non)linear serial dependence (NLSD) test for strictly stationary time series with non-Gaussian distributions. We show that in strictly stationary processes, the hypothesis of the absence of linear and nonlinear serial dependence can be tested by a multivariate portmanteau test involving nonlinear autocovariances, i.e., the autocovariance (matrices) of nonlinear transformations of a time series. This approach is available for univariate or multivariate processes, and the test statistic follows asymptotically a chi-square distribution under the null hypothesis
of serial independence
.
The NLSD test is inspired by the Generalized Covariance (GCov) specification test introduced by Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023). The GCov specification test allows for detecting nonlinear serial correlation in the residuals. It is a convenient one-step procedure that can replace multiple Box-Pierce and Ljung-Box tests for diagnostic checking of strictly stationary semi-parametric models with i.i.d. non-Gaussian errors. The advantage of the
semi-parametric approach is that it does not require any distributional assumptions on the errors other than being i.i.d. and non-Gaussian. The GCov specification test statistic has an asymptotic chi-square distribution under the null when the dynamic model is estimated by the semi-parametric Generalized Covariance (GCov)
estimator
, which is consistent, asymptotically normally distributed, and semi-parametrically efficient
3
3
3
It achieves the parametric efficiency
for a well-chosen set of nonlinear transformations.
[Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023)]. We study analytically and through simulations the properties of
the GCov specification test
under local alternative hypotheses to provide convincing arguments and empirical evidence of its potential as a widely applicable diagnostic tool.
We also extend the GCov specification test by considering a set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions increasing to infinity.
For size adjustments and power computation in finite samples, we introduce a new GCov bootstrap test. It enlarges the domain of applications to residual diagnostics in parametric models estimated by a Maximum Likelihood (ML) method under a distributional assumption on the errors.
This paper contributes to the literature on univariate and multivariate portmanteau tests. The GCov specification test can be compared to the test of the martingale difference hypothesis of De Gooijer (2023), which relies on a portmanteau test statistic computed from the residuals and squared residuals. The GCov spefication test is more general in the sense that it can include the autocovariances of various nonlinear functions of residuals rather than the residuals and their squares only. An alternative approach for specification testing is based on the auto-distance covariance [Fokianos and Pitsillou (2018) and references therein], or its auto-distance correlation (ADCF) counterpart [Davis et al. (2018)]. Wan and Davis (2022) consider
the auto-distance covariance (ADCV) function and propose a specification test of the null hypothesis of serial independence of errors [see also Chu (2023)]. The asymptotic distribution of
the ADVC test statistic is generally intractable, and the asymptotic critical values have to be approximated by bootstrap. In comparison, the GCov specification test based on the GCov estimator has the advantage of a known asymptotic distribution. Another difference between the ADCV and GCov methods is in the weights, which in the GCov procedure are optimally selected and estimated rather than being predetermined. For data analysis in the frequency domain, the inference methods of Velasco and Lobato (2018) are available, but are not discussed here as the focus of our paper is on the time domain only.
This paper also makes a contribution to the practice of time series analysis. There exists a growing literature on the SVAR models, motivated by the fact that shock identification in these models is feasible by assuming that the structural shocks are independent
and non-Gaussian.
In applied research, residual diagnostics are often disregarded, likely because applying multiple Ljung-Box tests to the data and then to the model residuals and their powers, for example, is too cumbersome.
Then, the model selection is based only on the goodness-of-fit criteria. For example, Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renne (2017), Lanne and Luoto (2019), Guay (2021), and Keweloh (2020) assume in their application that the errors are independent and non-Gaussian without reporting the results of tests for the absence of (non)linear serial dependence. Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renne (2018) write only that the Box-Pierce (1970) and Ljung-Box (1978) tests of the null hypothesis of absence of autocorrelation were applied to the residuals. Lanne, Meitz, and Saikkonen (2017) provide the most detailed description of applying the Ljung-Box test to residuals and report p-values. Thus, applied research would benefit from a convenient one-step test designed to detect nonlinear dependence in residuals.
The GCov-based specification test, in addition to being applicable to a variety of models with i.i.d. non-Gaussian errors, is particularly useful for testing the fit of causal-noncausal dynamic models with non-Gaussian errors. The reason is that
nonlinear autocovariances identify both causal and noncausal dynamics [Chan et al. (2006)]. There is a growing interest in univariate and multivariate mixed causal-noncausal models for processes with locally explosive patterns, such as short-lasting trends, bubbles and spikes, and time-varying volatility [see e.g. Hecq et al. (2016), (2020), Gourieroux and Jasiak (2017), (2023), Gourieroux and Zakoian (2017), Fries and Zakoian (2019), Davis and Song (2020), Hecq and Voisin (2021), Swensen (2022)]. In practice, locally explosive patterns characterize the time series of commodity prices, including oil, soybean, nickel, and aluminum prices, as well as cryptocurrency prices of native cryptocurrencies, tokens, and some stablecoins. The estimators available for this class of models are the aforementioned semi-parametric GCov estimator [Gourieroux and Jasiak (2017), (2023)] and the parametric (Approximate) Maximum Likelihood (AML), or ML estimators [Lanne and Saikkonen (2011), Davis and Song (2020)]. When the error distribution of a mixed model is misspecified, the AML estimator can be unreliable [Hecq, Lieb, and Telg (2016)],
adversely affecting the outcomes of any ML-based fit criteria, such as the AIC, Schwarz, and Hannan-Quinn criteria. Hence, in these models, the proposed tests arise as convenient tools for both detecting nonlinear serial dependence in the data and testing the goodness of fit.
The following notation is used. For any
m
Г—
K
m\times K
matrix
A
A
with the
k
k
th column
a
k
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
a_{k},k=1,...,K
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
A
)
vec(A)
will denote the column vector of dimension
m
вҖӢ
K
mK
defined as:
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
A
)
=
(
a
1
вҖІ
вҖӢ
вҖҰ
,
a
k
вҖІ
,
вҖҰ
,
a
K
вҖІ
)
вҖІ
,
vec(A)=(a_{1}^{\prime}...,a_{k}^{\prime},...,a_{K}^{\prime})^{\prime},
where the prime denotes a transpose. For any two matrices
A
вүЎ
(
a
i
вҖӢ
k
)
A\equiv(a_{ik})
and
B
B
, the Kronecker product
(
A
вҠ—
B
)
(A\otimes B)
is the block matrix with the
(
i
,
k
)
(i,k)
th block denoted by
a
i
вҖӢ
k
вҖӢ
B
a_{ik}B
.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the NLSD test for time series inspired by the classical multivariate portmanteau test, which is briefly reviewed. Section 3 reviews the GCov estimator and describes the GCov specification test.
It provides new results on the asymptotic properties of this test under a sequence of local alternatives. Section 4 introduces the GCov bootstrap test. Section 5 examines how the asymptotic performance of the GCov specification test can be improved by increasing the set of nonlinear autocovariances. Section 6 presents the simulation results. Section 7 presents an empirical application of the GCov specification test to a mixed causal-noncausal model fitted to monthly aluminum prices recorded between 2005 and 2024. Section 8 concludes. The Online Appendix contains the technical results in Appendices A, B, and additional simulations and empirical results in Appendix C.
2
NLSD Test for Non-Gaussian Processes
In this section, we first recall the existing results on the weak white noise hypothesis test. Next, we introduce a new test of the absence of linear and nonlinear serial dependence (NLSD) for non-Gaussian processes based on a portmanteau statistic involving nonlinear transformations of strictly stationary univariate or multivariate time series with non-Gaussian marginal distributions and nonlinear dynamics.
2.1
Linear Serial Dependence in Time Series
This section summarizes the results
on the test of the weak white noise hypothesis, i.e., the absence of linear serial dependence in time series.
2.1.1
Univariate Time Series
Let us consider a univariate stationary time series
(
y
t
)
(y_{t})
with finite fourth-order moments
4
4
4
The existence of moments up to order 4 is needed to derive the asymptotic variance of
Оі
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\hat{\gamma}(h)
under the asymptotic normality.
. The test of the weak white noise hypothesis
H
0
=
{
Оі
(
h
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
.
,
H
}
H_{0}=\{\gamma(h)=0,h=1,....,H\}
, with
Оі
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
C
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
y
t
вҲ’
h
)
\gamma(h)=Cov(y_{t},y_{t-h})
is commonly based on the test statistic:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
ПҒ
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
2
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
Оі
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
2
Оі
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
2
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}\hat{\rho}(h)^{2}=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}\frac{\hat{\gamma}(h)^{2}}{\hat{\gamma}(0)^{2}},
(2.1)
where
Оі
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\hat{\gamma}(h)
and
ПҒ
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\hat{\rho}(h)
are the sample autocovariance and autocorrelation of order
h
h
, respectively, computed from a sample of
T
T
observations
5
5
5
In this Section the index
T
T
of the estimators, e.g.,
Оі
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\hat{\gamma}_{T}(h)
, is omitted to simplify the notation.
.
Under the null hypothesis of serial independence and standard regularity conditions, this statistic follows asymptotically a chi-square distribution
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\chi^{2}(H)
with
H
H
degrees of freedom [see Box and Pierce ( 1970)].
2.1.2
Multivariate Time Series
Let us now consider a strictly stationary time series
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
of dimension
m
m
with finite fourth-order moments. The null hypothesis is
H
0
=
{
О“
(
h
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
.
,
H
}
H_{0}=\{\Gamma(h)=0,h=1,....,H\}
, where
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
C
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
,
Y
t
вҲ’
h
)
\Gamma(h)=Cov(Y_{t},Y_{t-h})
is the autocovariance (matrix) of order
h
h
. The multivariate equivalent of the test statistic (2.1) is:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
R
^
2
вҖӢ
(
h
)
]
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\hat{R}^{2}(h)],
(2.2)
where
R
^
2
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\hat{R}^{2}(h)
is the sample analogue of the multivariate R-square defined by:
R
2
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
.
R^{2}(h)=\Gamma(h)\Gamma(0)^{-1}\Gamma(h)^{\prime}\Gamma(0)^{-1}.
(2.3)
Since
R
^
2
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
1
/
2
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
]
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
,
\hat{R}^{2}(h)=\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{1/2}[\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1/2}\hat{\Gamma}(h)\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}(h)^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1/2}]\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1/2},
(2.4)
this matrix is equivalent up to a change of basis to the matrix within the brackets, which is symmetric and positive-definite. Therefore, it is diagonalizable, with a trace equal to the sum of its eigenvalues, which are the squares of the empirical canonical correlations between
Y
t
Y_{t}
and
Y
t
вҲ’
h
Y_{t-h}
, denoted by
ПҒ
^
i
2
(
h
)
,
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
.
,
m
\hat{\rho}_{i}^{2}(h),i=1,....,m
[Hotelling (1936)]:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
[
вҲ‘
i
=
1
m
ПҒ
^
i
вҖӢ
(
h
)
2
]
.
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\hat{\Gamma}(h)\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}(h)^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}]=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}[\sum_{i=1}^{m}\hat{\rho}_{i}(h)^{2}].
Under the null hypothesis of strong white noise, this statistic follows asymptotically a chi-square distribution
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
m
вҖӢ
H
)
\chi^{2}(mH)
[see, e.g., Robinson (1973), Anderson (1999), Section 7, Anderson (2002), Section 5].
2.2
Nonlinear Serial Dependence in Time Series
The NLSD test based on nonlinear functions of a strictly stationary process with a non-Gaussian distribution extends the approach presented in the previous section. For processes with Gaussian distributions, zero-valued autocovariances are equivalent to serial independence, which becomes the null hypothesis of interest. Then, the asymptotic distribution of the test statistics
is determined under that null hypothesis. In the case of non-Gaussian processes, zero-valued linear autocovariances do not imply serial independence.
Chan et al. (2006) and Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023) show that the nonlinear autocovariances, i.e., the autocovariances of nonlinear functions of non-Gaussian processes reveal and identify the nonlinear and noncausal serial dependencies. This
suggests that the null hypothesis of the absence of (non)linear serial dependence in univariate or multivariate time series
Y
t
Y_{t}
can be tested by applying the test statistic
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)
to a set of nonlinear transformations of
Y
t
Y_{t}
. Thus, the NLSD test concerns the null hypothesis of zero autocovariances of the transformed series.
We consider nonlinear transformations
Y
t
a
Y_{t}^{a}
of a univariate or multivariate non-Gaussian process
Y
t
Y_{t}
, where
a
=
{
a
1
,
a
2
,
вҖҰ
}
a=\{a_{1},a_{2},...\}
is a set of nonlinear scalar functions satisfying the regularity conditions given in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023).
The transformations include
Y
t
Y_{t}
to accommodate linear serial dependence and the powers of
Y
t
Y_{t}
, for example, to account for nonlinear serial dependence. If the process has fat tails, the existence of the fourth-moment condition may not be satisfied by
Y
t
Y_{t}
, but instead by a well-chosen transformation
a
k
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
)
a_{k}(Y_{t})
. Hence, transformations such as
Y
t
\sqrt{Y_{t}}
,
log
вҒЎ
Y
t
\log Y_{t}
, or
1
/
(
1
+
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
Y
t
)
)
1/(1+\exp(-Y_{t}))
of univariate positive processes can be used depending on the tails of their distributions.
For ease of exposition, let us introduce
K
K
nonlinear scalar functions
a
1
,
вҖҰ
,
a
K
a_{1},...,a_{K}
of the process (
Y
t
Y_{t}
), transforming it into a multivariate process of dimension
K
K
with components
a
k
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
)
a_{k}(Y_{t})
:
Y
t
a
=
(
a
1
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
)
вӢ®
a
K
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
)
)
,
Y_{t}^{a}=\left(\begin{array}[]{c}a_{1}(Y_{t})\\
\vdots\\
a_{K}(Y_{t})\end{array}\right),
We compute the sample autocovariances of the transformations
a
k
вҖӢ
(
Y
t
)
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
a_{k}(Y_{t}),k=1,...,K
:
О“
^
a
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
h
T
Y
t
a
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
h
a
вҖІ
вҲ’
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
h
T
вҲ’
1
Y
t
a
вҖІ
вҖӢ
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
h
+
1
T
Y
t
вҲ’
h
a
.
\hat{\Gamma}^{a}(h)=\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=h}^{T}Y_{t}^{a}Y_{t-h}^{a^{\prime}}-\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=h}^{T-1}Y_{t}^{a^{\prime}}\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=h+1}^{T}Y_{t-h}^{a}.
Once a set of transformations is determined, the null hypothesis:
H
0
,
a
=
(
О“
a
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
)
,
H_{0,a}=(\Gamma^{a}(h)=0,\;h=1,...,H),
is used to test for the absence of (non)linear serial dependence. Because one cannot consider all the lags and nonlinear transformations, the null hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
is not equivalent to the serial independence condition, but is arbitrarily close to it, depending on the lag
H
H
and the set of nonlinear transformations considered [see Section 5].
Then, the NLSD test statistic:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
a
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
R
^
a
2
вҖӢ
(
h
)
]
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)_{a}=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}Tr{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}[}\hat{R}_{a}^{2}(h){\color[rgb]{0,0,0}]},
(2.5)
where:
R
^
a
2
(
h
)
=
О“
^
a
(
h
)
О“
^
a
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
О“
^
a
(
h
)
вҖІ
О“
^
a
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
,
\hat{R}_{a}^{2}(h)=\hat{\Gamma}_{a}(h)\hat{\Gamma}_{a}(0)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}_{a}(h)^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}_{a}(0)^{-1}],
is computed from the nonlinear sample autocovariances, i.e., sample autocovariance matrices of a transformed univariate or multivariate process. In each case, the dimension of the process can be increased, i.e., become higher than that of the initial time series of interest. By analogy to the traditional literature, we use the independence hypothesis to obtain the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic. If the dimension of the transformed process is
K
K
, then under serial independence, the NLSD test statistic
(
2.5
)
follows asymptotically a
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
)
\chi^{2}(K^{2}H)
distribution [see, e.g., Robinson (1973), Chitturi (1976), Anderson (1999), Section 7, Anderson (2002), Section 5]. The test of the null hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
at level
Оұ
\alpha
is performed as follows: the null hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
is rejected when
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
a
>
ПҮ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)_{a}>\chi^{2}_{1-\alpha}(K^{2}H)
and
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
is not rejected, otherwise.
3
GCov Specification Test for Semi-Parametric Models
The NLSD test introduced in Section 2.2 is a special case of the Generalized Covariance (GCov) specification test introduced by Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023) for semi-parametric nonlinear models of strictly stationary time series with i.i.d. errors and parameter vector
Оё
\theta
describing their dynamics. In this context,
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)
is computed from a multivariate time series of residuals and their nonlinear transforms instead of an observed time series, which reduces the degrees of freedom of its limiting
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution [Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023)]. The model and GCov test are reviewed below.
3.1
The Semi-Parametric Model
Let us consider a strictly stationary process
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
satisfying a semi-parametric model studied in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023):
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
)
=
u
t
,
g(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta)=u_{t},
(3.1)
where
g
g
is a known function with
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
g
)
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
dim(g)=dim(u_{t})
,
Y
~
t
=
(
Y
t
,
Y
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
t
вҲ’
p
)
\tilde{Y}_{t}=(Y_{t},Y_{t-1},\ldots,Y_{t-p})
,
p
p
is a non-negative integer,
(
u
t
)
(u_{t})
is an i.i.d. sequence of errors (not necessarily with mean zero) with a common marginal density function
f
f
and
Оё
\theta
is an unknown parameter vector of dimension
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
dim(\theta)
. We assume that the model is well-specified, the true value of parameter
Оё
\theta
is
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
, and the true error density is
f
0
f_{0}
.
Moreover,
u
t
u_{t}
is not assumed to be independent of
Y
~
t
вҲ’
1
\tilde{Y}_{t-1}
.

Hence, errors
u
t
u_{t}
are not necessarily interpretable as
innovations, assuming that
g
(
Y
t
,
Y
t
вҲ’
1
,
.
.
;
Оё
)
g(Y_{t},Y_{t-1},..;\theta)
is an invertible function of
Y
t
Y_{t}
.
Similarly, as was done in Section 2.2, a process following model (
3.1
) can be transformed into a system of dimension
K
K
by considering (linear and) nonlinear scalar transformations of
u
t
u_{t}
. Let us introduce
K
K
nonlinear transformations
a
1
,
вҖҰ
,
a
K
a_{1},...,a_{K}
. Then we have:
a
k
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
]
\displaystyle a_{k}[g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)]
=
\displaystyle=
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
,
\displaystyle a_{k}(u_{t}),\;k=1,...,K,
or, equivalently
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
]
\displaystyle\mbox{or, equivalently}\;\;a[g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)]
=
\displaystyle=
a
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
вүЎ
v
t
,
\displaystyle a(u_{t})\equiv v_{t},
(3.2)
where the transformed process
(
v
t
)
(v_{t})
is also an i.i.d. process. Henceforth, the subscripts of transformations
a
a
are omitted for clarity.
3.2
The GCov Specification Test
We consider the null hypothesis of the absence of (non)linear serial dependence in i.i.d. errors whose distribution is left unspecified. The portmanteau test statistic for testing the model specification is:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
L
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
)
,
where
вҖӢ
L
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
R
^
T
2
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
^
T
)
]
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=TL_{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}),\;\;\mbox{where}\;\;L_{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T})=\sum\limits_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\hat{R}_{T}^{2}(h,\hat{\theta}_{T})],
(3.3)
and
R
^
T
2
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
)
=
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
^
T
)
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
^
T
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
^
T
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
^
T
)
вҲ’
1
,
\hat{R}_{T}^{2}(h,\theta)=\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\hat{\theta}_{T})\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(0;\hat{\theta}_{T})^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\hat{\theta}_{T})^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(0;\hat{\theta}_{T})^{-1},
(3.4)
and the estimated autocovariances
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
^
T
)
\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\hat{\theta}_{T})
are the sample autocovariances
6
6
6
They have to be divided by
T
T
instead of
(
T
вҲ’
H
вҲ’
p
)
(T-H-p)
to ensure that the sequence of multivariate sample autocovariances remains positive semi-definite.
of the residuals
u
^
t
,
T
=
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
)
=
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
^
T
)
\hat{u}_{t,T}=u_{t}(\hat{\theta}_{T})=g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\hat{\theta}_{T})
evaluated at the GCov estimator
Оё
^
T
\hat{\theta}_{T}
of
Оё
\theta
defined by:
Оё
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
A
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
Оё
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
R
^
T
2
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
)
]
.
\hat{\theta}_{T}(H)=Argmin_{\theta}\sum\limits_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\hat{R}_{T}^{2}(h,\theta)].
(3.5)
When model (3.1) is well-specified, and the true value
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
is identifiable from the zero nonlinear autocovariance conditions, the one-step GCov estimator is consistent, asymptotically normally distributed, and attains a semi-parametric efficiency bound, under standard regularity conditions [Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023), assumptions A.1, A.2 and Proposition 3]. Then, the GCov portmanteau test statistic
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)
follows asymptotically the chi-square distribution with degrees of freedom equal to
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
K^{2}H-dim(\theta)
[see Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023), Proposition 4]. This result holds only for the GCov estimator
Оё
^
T
\hat{\theta}_{T}
.
The GCov specification test can be applied as a diagnostic tool to a variety of dynamic models, with i.i.d. non-Gaussian errors, including the following ones:
Example 1: Double Autoregressive DAR(1) Model
y
t
=
П•
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
+
u
t
вҖӢ
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
,
y_{t}=\phi y_{t-1}+u_{t}\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}},
where
w
>
0
,
П•
вүҘ
0
,
Оұ
вүҘ
0
w>0,\phi\geq 0,\alpha\geq 0
,
Оё
=
(
w
,
П•
,
Оұ
)
вҖІ
\theta=(w,\phi,\alpha)^{\prime}
and the
u
t
u_{t}
вҖҷs are i.i.d. with a Gaussian or non-Gaussian distribution [Ling (2007)]. We assume that
E
вҖӢ
(
l
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
|
П•
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
u
|
)
<
0
E(log|\phi+\sqrt{\alpha}u|)<0
and the regularity conditions on functions
Оё
,
f
\theta,f
are satisfied, ensuring the existence of a strictly stationary solution.
Then, the semi-parametric representation (
3.1
) of this model is
g
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
=
[
(
y
t
вҲ’
П•
y
t
вҲ’
1
)
/
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
=
u
t
,
g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)=[(y_{t}-\phi y_{t-1})/\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}=u_{t},
In particular, this process is strictly stationary for
П•
=
1
\phi=1
(i.e., in the unit root case) due to the volatility induced mean reversion.
Example 2: Mixed (Causal-Noncausal) Autoregressive MAR(r,s) Model
(
1
вҲ’
П•
1
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
П•
2
вҖӢ
L
2
вҲ’
вҖҰ
вҲ’
П•
r
вҖӢ
L
r
)
вҖӢ
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
1
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
2
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
2
вҲ’
вҖҰ
вҲ’
ПҲ
s
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
s
)
вҖӢ
y
t
=
u
t
,
(1-\phi_{1}L-\phi_{2}L^{2}-...-\phi_{r}L^{r})(1-\psi_{1}L^{-1}-\psi_{2}L^{-2}-...-\psi_{s}L^{-s})y_{t}=u_{t},
(3.6)
where the errors are i.i.d., non-Gaussian and such that
E
вҖӢ
(
|
u
t
|
Оҙ
)
<
вҲһ
E(|u_{t}|^{\delta})<\infty
for
Оҙ
>
0
\delta>0
. The polynomials
ОҰ
вҖӢ
(
L
)
\Phi(L)
and
ОЁ
вҖӢ
(
L
)
\Psi(L)
in
L
L
are of degrees
r
r
and
s
s
, respectively, with roots strictly outside the unit circle and such that
ОҰ
вҖӢ
(
0
)
=
ОЁ
вҖӢ
(
0
)
=
1
\Phi(0)=\Psi(0)=1
. For
r
=
s
=
1
r=s=1
, the MAR(1,1) model is obtained:
(
1
вҲ’
П•
вҖӢ
L
)
вҖӢ
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
=
u
t
,
(1-\phi L)(1-\psi L^{-1})y_{t}=u_{t},
(3.7)
where the autoregressive coefficients satisfy the condition
|
П•
|
<
1
|\phi|<1
and
|
ПҲ
|
<
1
|\psi|<1
for strict stationarity. Coefficient
П•
\phi
represents the standard causal persistence, while coefficient
ПҲ
\psi
determines noncausal persistence, along with
locally explosive patterns and conditional heteroscedasticity. For the MAR(1,1) we have
Оё
=
(
П•
,
ПҲ
)
вҖІ
\theta=(\phi,\psi)^{\prime}
, and the semi-parametric representation (
3.1
) of this model is:
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
=
ОҰ
вҖӢ
(
L
)
вҖӢ
ОЁ
вҖӢ
(
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
=
u
t
.
g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)=\Phi(L)\Psi(L^{-1})y_{t}=u_{t}.
Example 3: Causal SVAR(p) Model
Y
t
=
ОҰ
1
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
1
+
вӢҜ
+
ОҰ
p
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
p
+
D
вҖӢ
u
t
,
Y_{t}=\Phi_{1}Y_{t-1}+\cdots+\Phi_{p}Y_{t-p}+Du_{t},
where
Оё
=
[
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
ОҰ
1
вҖІ
,
вҖҰ
,
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
ОҰ
p
вҖІ
]
вҖІ
\theta=[vec\Phi_{1}^{\prime},...,vec\Phi_{p}^{\prime}]^{\prime}
,
u
t
u_{t}
is a multivariate, non-Gaussian, serially and cross-sectionally i.i.d. error  and matrix
D
D
is square and invertible.
The roots of the characteristic equation
d
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
(
I
вҖӢ
d
вҲ’
ОҰ
1
вҖӢ
О»
вҲ’
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
ОҰ
p
вҖӢ
О»
p
)
=
0
det(Id-\Phi_{1}\lambda-\cdots\Phi_{p}\lambda^{p})=0
are of modulus strictly greater than one. We have
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
=
D
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
[
Y
t
вҲ’
ОҰ
1
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
вӢҜ
вҲ’
ОҰ
p
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
p
]
=
u
t
.
g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)=D^{-1}[Y_{t}-\Phi_{1}Y_{t-1}-\cdots-\Phi_{p}Y_{t-p}]=u_{t}.
This model is commonly used in macroeconomic applications.
Example 4: Causal-Noncausal VAR(p) Model
The model is specified as above except that the roots of the characteristic equation
d
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
t
вҖӢ
(
I
вҖӢ
d
вҲ’
ОҰ
1
вҖӢ
О»
вҲ’
вӢҜ
вҖӢ
ОҰ
p
вҖӢ
О»
p
)
=
0
det(Id-\Phi_{1}\lambda-\cdots\Phi_{p}\lambda^{p})=0
are of modulus either strictly greater, or smaller than one
and the errors are not necessarily assumed to be cross-sectionally independent. The roots located inside the unit circle create locally explosive patterns and conditional heteroscedasticity, like in the MAR(r,s) model. There exists a unique (strictly) stationary solution
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
with a two-sided
M
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
(
вҲһ
)
MA(\infty)
representation, which satisfies model (
3.1
) with:
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
=
Y
t
вҲ’
ОҰ
1
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
вӢҜ
вҲ’
ОҰ
p
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
p
=
u
t
.
g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)=Y_{t}-\Phi_{1}Y_{t-1}-\cdots-\Phi_{p}Y_{t-p}=u_{t}.
The causal-noncausal VAR(p) model has been studied in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2017),(2023), Davis and Song (2020), and Swenson (2020).
3.3
Asymptotic Properties of the GCov Specification Test
This section presents new results on the asymptotic properties of the GCov specification test under local alternatives.
By focusing on the local alternatives, we can study hypotheses on the parameters of a semi-parametric model, given the marginal error distribution and extend the results on the asymptotic distribution of the GCov test statistic derived in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023).
3.3.1
Null Hypothesis and Asymptotic Size
Let us discuss the null hypothesis in the semi-parametric framework. As mentioned earlier, there are two types of parameters: vector
Оё
\theta
defining the dynamics, and functional parameter
f
f
defining the error distribution. Hence, the theoretical autocovariances
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
\Gamma(h;\theta,f)
are functions of both
Оё
\theta
and
f
f
. Suppose that
Оё
0
,
f
0
\theta_{0},f_{0}
are identifiable from the condition:
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
\Gamma_{0}(h;\theta,f)=0,\;h=1,...,H
7
7
7
For example, in the SVAR model, identification can be ensured by assuming that the components of errors
u
t
u_{t}
are cross-sectionally independent and non-Gaussian. A detailed discussion of identification is out of the scope of this paper.
. Then, the null hypothesis becomes:
H
0
:
{
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
,
H_{0}:\{\Gamma_{0}(h)=0,\;h=1,...,H\},
where
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\Gamma_{0}(h)
is the true autocovariance. In terms of parameters
Оё
,
f
\theta,f
, it corresponds to the parameter set
Оҳ
0
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
(
О“
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
\Theta_{0}=\{\theta,f:(\Gamma(h;\theta,f)=0,\;h=1,...,H\}
.
So far, the transformation
a
a
has not been introduced to simplify the notation. When these transformations are accounted for, the null hypothesis and the associated parameter set become:
H
0
,
a
вүҲ
Оҳ
0
,
a
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
.
H_{0,a}\approx\Theta_{0,a}=\{\theta,f:\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\theta,f)=0,\;h=1,...,H\}.
where
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\theta,f)
is the true autocovariance of the transformed errors at lag
h
h
. When the error terms
u
t
u_{t}
are serially independent, the nonlinear autocovariances
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
=
0
,
вҲҖ
h
\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})=0,\;\forall h
. Hence, if the model is correctly specified,
the GCov test does not reject the null hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
of the absence of linear and nonlinear dependence in the errors
u
t
u_{t}
.
The test of hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
at level
Оұ
\alpha
is performed as follows: the null hypothesis
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
is rejected when
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
a
>
ПҮ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)_{a}>\chi^{2}_{1-\alpha}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))
and
H
0
,
a
H_{0,a}
is not rejected otherwise. The asymptotic size tends to the nominal size when
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
T\rightarrow\infty
:
lim
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
P
Оё
,
f
вҖӢ
[
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
a
>
ПҮ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
]
=
Оұ
,
вҲҖ
Оё
,
f
вҲҲ
Оҳ
0
,
вҲҖ
Оұ
.
\lim_{T\rightarrow\infty}P_{\theta,f}[\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)_{a}>\chi^{2}_{1-\alpha}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))]=\alpha,\;\forall\theta,f\in\Theta_{0},\;\forall\alpha.
3.3.2
Local Alternatives and Local Power
Rather than evaluating the performance of our test against a fixed alternative, we can examine a sequence of local alternatives that drift towards the null at rate
1
T
\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}
.
The drifting sequence of local alternatives makes it harder and harder to reject the null as the sample grows. The evaluation of the test under several types of local alternatives reveals the direction of alternative to consider when the null hypothesis is rejected [Davidson and MacKinnon (2006), Section 3, Escanciano (2007), Section 2.3, Dovonon, Hall, and Kleibergen (2020), Section 4].
Because the semi-parametric model depends not only on the vector of dynamic parameters
Оё
\theta
but also on the functional parameter
f
f
, the general alternative hypothesis is difficult to formulate.
In particular, the alternative could contain models in which
u
t
u_{t}
вҖҷs are serially dependent, and we would need to introduce additional parameters to accommodate these cases.
For clarity, we omit in this Section the subscripts
a
a
of transformation, and assume a semi-parametric alternative model defined by:
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
=
u
t
,
where
вҖӢ
u
t
вҖӢ
are i.i.d.
,
g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,\gamma)=u_{t},\;\mbox{where}\;u_{t}\;\mbox{are i.i.d.},
(3.8)
with an additional (scalar) parameter
Оі
\gamma
, a known function
g
вҲ—
g^{*}
, such that
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
0
)
=
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
)
g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,0)=g(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta)
and dimension
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
g
вҲ—
)
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
dim(g^{*})=dim(u_{t})
. Under this alternative model, the autocovariances depend on
Оё
,
Оі
\theta,\gamma
and the marginal distribution
f
f
of errors
u
t
u_{t}
, and are denoted by
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
Оі
,
f
)
\Gamma(h;\theta,\gamma,f)
.
The alternative hypothesis based on autocovariances is parametrized by
Оё
,
Оі
,
f
\theta,\gamma,f
. It is written, in terms of the parameters as:
H
1
вүҲ
Оҳ
1
=
{
Оё
,
Оі
,
f
:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
Оі
,
f
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
H_{1}\approx\Theta_{1}=\{\theta,\gamma,f:\Gamma(h;\theta,\gamma,f)=0,\;h=1,...,H\}
and the null hypothesis is:
H
0
=
{
Оё
,
Оі
,
f
:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
0
,
f
)
=
0
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
=
{
Оі
=
0
}
вҲ©
H
1
.
H_{0}=\{\theta,\gamma,f:\Gamma(h;\theta,0,f)=0,\;h=1,...,H\}=\{\gamma=0\}\cap H_{1}.
Let us examine the fixed and local alternatives in the context of the DAR(1) model. The alternatives concern the presence of serial dependence at higher lags in 1. the conditional mean, and 2. the conditional variance.
Example 4: DAR(1) model cont.
The (fixed) alternative models are:
1.
y
t
=
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
+
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
+
u
t
вҖӢ
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
y_{t}=\phi_{1}y_{t-1}+\gamma y_{t-2}+u_{t}\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}
, or
u
t
=
(
y
t
вҲ’
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
)
/
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
=
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
u_{t}=(y_{t}-\phi_{1}y_{t-1}-\gamma y_{t-2})/\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}=g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,\gamma)
2.
y
t
=
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
+
u
t
вҖӢ
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
+
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
2
y_{t}=\phi_{1}y_{t-1}+u_{t}\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}+\gamma y_{t-2}^{2}}
, or
u
t
=
(
y
t
вҲ’
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
)
/
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
+
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
2
=
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
u_{t}=(y_{t}-\phi_{1}y_{t-1})/\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}+\gamma y_{t-2}^{2}}=g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,\gamma)
The above alternative models 1-2 depend on an additional parameter
Оі
\gamma
. They are equivalent when
Оі
=
0
\gamma=0
, or extend the model in various directions when
Оі
вү 
0
\gamma\neq 0
. Thus, we have a set of directional alternatives.
The local alternatives are defined in a neighborhood of the true value
Оё
0
,
f
0
\theta_{0},f_{0}
satisfying the null hypothesis. We consider parametric directional alternatives where:
Оё
T
вүҲ
Оё
0
+
Ој
/
T
,
Оі
T
вүҲ
ОҪ
/
T
,
f
T
вүҲ
f
0
.
\theta_{T}\approx\theta_{0}+\mu/\sqrt{T},\;\;\gamma_{T}\approx\nu/\sqrt{T},\;\;f_{T}\approx f_{0}.
Example 5: DAR(1) model cont.
The local alternatives of the DAR model are obtained by the first-order Taylor expansion about
Оі
=
0
\gamma=0
of alternative models 1 to 2 given above. We get:
1.
y
t
=
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
+
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
+
u
t
вҖӢ
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
y_{t}=\phi_{1}y_{t-1}+\gamma y_{t-2}+u_{t}\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}
, or
u
t
=
(
y
t
вҲ’
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
вҲ’
Оі
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
)
/
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
=
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
u_{t}=(y_{t}-\phi_{1}y_{t-1}-\gamma y_{t-2})/\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}=g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,\gamma)
2.
y
t
вүҲ
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
+
u
t
вҖӢ
[
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
+
Оі
2
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
2
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
]
y_{t}\approx\phi_{1}y_{t-1}+u_{t}\left[\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}+\frac{\gamma}{2}\frac{y_{t-2}^{2}}{\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}}\right]
, or
u
t
вүҲ
(
y
t
вҲ’
П•
1
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
)
/
[
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
+
Оі
2
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
2
2
w
+
Оұ
вҖӢ
y
t
вҲ’
1
2
]
вүҲ
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
u_{t}\approx(y_{t}-\phi_{1}y_{t-1})/\left[\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}+\frac{\gamma}{2}\frac{y_{t-2}^{2}}{\sqrt{w+\alpha y_{t-1}^{2}}}\right]\approx g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{t};\theta,\gamma)
Under the sequence of local alternatives, we consider doubly indexed sequences
(
y
T
,
t
)
(y_{T,t})
, i.e., a sequence of processes indexed by
T
T
(triangular array).
In this framework, what matters is the local impact on autocovariances, i.e.,:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
вүҲ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
+
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
вҖӢ
(
Оё
T
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
+
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оі
вҖІ
вҖӢ
(
Оі
T
вҲ’
Оі
0
)
,
\Gamma(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})\approx\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})+\frac{\partial\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}(\theta_{T}-\theta_{0})+\frac{\partial\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})}{\partial\gamma^{\prime}}(\gamma_{T}-\gamma_{0}),
with
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
=
0
\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})=0
. This leads to local alternatives written on the autocovariances:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
=
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
/
T
,
\Gamma(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})=\Delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)/\sqrt{T},
(3.9)
with:
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
=
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
вҖӢ
Ој
+
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оі
вҖІ
вҖӢ
ОҪ
.
\Delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)=\frac{\partial\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}\mu+\frac{\partial\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})}{\partial\gamma^{\prime}}\nu.
(3.10)
whose vec representation is denoted by
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
=
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
\delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)=vec\Delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)
.
Then, the asymptotic local power of the test, given
f
0
f_{0}
fixed, is
lim
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
P
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
вҖӢ
[
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
>
ПҮ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
]
=
ОІ
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
;
Оұ
)
,
\lim_{T\rightarrow\infty}P_{\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0}}[\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)>\chi^{2}_{1-\alpha}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))]=\beta(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu;\alpha),
for any
Ој
,
ОҪ
,
Оұ
\mu,\nu,\alpha
and
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲҲ
Оҳ
0
(\theta_{0},f_{0})\in\Theta_{0}
.
Proposition 1:
Under the sequence of local alternatives, and the regularity conditions given in Appendices B.1-B.2:
i) The autocovariance estimator:
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
=
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
g
вҖӢ
(
y
T
,
t
;
Оё
)
вҖӢ
g
вҖІ
вҖӢ
(
y
T
,
t
вҲ’
h
;
Оё
)
вҲ’
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
g
вҖӢ
(
y
T
,
t
;
Оё
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
g
вҖӢ
(
y
T
,
t
;
Оё
)
\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta)=\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}g(y_{T,t};\theta)g^{\prime}(y_{T,t-h};\theta)-\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}g(y_{T,t};\theta)^{\prime}\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}g(y_{T,t};\theta)
converges in probability:
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
вҶ’
p
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
,
\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta){\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}}\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0}),
for all
Оё
,
h
\theta,h
where the limit is computed under the null hypothesis. This convergence is uniform in
Оё
\theta
.
ii) The GCov estimator converges in probability to
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
:
Оё
^
T
вҶ’
p
Оё
0
.
\hat{\theta}_{T}{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}}\theta_{0}.
Proof:
i) The proof is based on the Law of Large Numbers (LLN) for doubly indexed sequences [see e.g., Andrews (1988), Newey (1991) and Appendices B.1-B.2 for regularity conditions]. The LLN implies the convergence of the estimated autocovariances.
ii) Under the sequence of local alternatives, the objective function:
L
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
)
вҲ’
1
]
,
L_{T}(\theta)=\sum\limits_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta)\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(0;\theta)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta)^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(0;\theta)^{-1}],
(3.11)
tends to
L
вҲһ
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
,
Оё
)
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
,
Оё
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
,
Оё
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
,
Оё
)
вҲ’
1
]
.
L_{\infty}(\theta)=\sum\limits_{h=1}^{H}Tr[\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0},\theta)\Gamma(0;\theta_{0},0,f_{0},\theta)^{-1}\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0},\theta)^{\prime}\Gamma(0;\theta_{0},0,f_{0},\theta)^{-1}].
(3.12)
This limit is the same as the limit of the objective function under the null hypothesis. Then, the consistency is proven as in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023).
 QED
Let us now show that the GCov specification test statistic converges in distribution under local alternatives to a non-central chi-square distributed variable with a non-centrality parameter involving the direction of the alternative.
The distribution of the test statistic computed from the residuals of the model
g
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
Оё
)
=
u
t
g(y_{t},\theta)=u_{t}
estimated by the GCov estimator under the sequence of local alternatives is given in Proposition 2 below.
Proposition 2:
Let us consider the specification test of the null hypothesis:
H
0
=
Оҳ
0
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
,
f
)
=
0
вҖӢ
вҲҖ
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
,
H_{0}=\Theta_{0}=\{\theta,f:\Gamma(h;\theta,f)=0\;\;\forall h=1,...,H\},
against the sequence of local alternatives:
H
1
,
T
=
Оҳ
1
,
T
=
{
Оё
=
Оё
0
+
Ој
/
T
,
Оі
=
ОҪ
/
T
,
f
=
f
0
,
with
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲҲ
Оҳ
0
}
.
H_{1,T}=\Theta_{1,T}=\{\theta=\theta_{0}+\mu/\sqrt{T},\gamma=\nu/\sqrt{T},f=f_{0},\;\mbox{with}\;(\theta_{0},f_{0})\in\Theta_{0}\}.
The expansion of the test statistic under the sequence of local alternatives is:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
{
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
вҖӢ
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
}
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}\{vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]\}+o_{p}(1),
(3.13)
where
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
\displaystyle\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})
=
\displaystyle=
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҲ’
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
\displaystyle[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]-[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}
{
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖӢ
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
}
вҲ’
1
\displaystyle\left\{\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta}[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})}{\partial\theta}\right\}^{-1}
Г—
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
вҖӢ
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
.
\displaystyle\times\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}].
Then, under the sequence of local alternatives,
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
вҖӢ
вҲј
рқ‘‘
вҖӢ
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
,
О»
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
)
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)\overset{d}{\sim}\chi^{2}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta),\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)),
where the non-centrality parameter is:
О»
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
Оҙ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
вҖІ
О 
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
Оҙ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
)
,
\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)=\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}\delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)^{\prime}\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})\delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)),
with
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
=
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
вҖӢ
Ој
+
вҲӮ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оі
вҖІ
вҖӢ
ОҪ
\delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)=\frac{\partial\Gamma(h;\theta_{0},0,f_{0})}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}\mu+\frac{\partial\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},0,f_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\gamma^{\prime}}\nu
.
Proof:
The proof of Proposition 2 is based on the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) for doubly indexed sequences [see, e.g., Wooldridge and White (1988)] and given in Appendices B.5-B.6.
Let the cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of the non-central chi-square distribution be denoted by
F
вҖӢ
(
x
;
Оә
,
О»
)
F(x;\kappa,\lambda)
, where
Оә
\kappa
denotes the degrees of freedom and
О»
\lambda
is the non-centrality parameter.
Then,
F
вҖӢ
(
x
;
Оә
,
О»
)
=
1
вҲ’
Q
Оә
/
2
вҖӢ
(
О»
,
x
)
F(x;\kappa,\lambda)=1-Q_{\kappa/2}(\sqrt{\lambda},\sqrt{x})
, where
Q
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
b
)
Q_{\delta}(a,b)
is a Marcum Q-function. For positive integer values of
Оҙ
\delta
, the Marcum Q-function is defined by:
Q
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
b
)
=
{
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
b
)
a
<
b
,
0.5
+
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
a
)
,
a
=
b
,
1
+
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
b
)
,
a
>
b
,
Q_{\delta}(a,b)=\left\{\begin{array}[]{ll}H_{\delta}(a,b)&a<b,\\
0.5+H_{\delta}(a,a),&a=b,\\
1+H_{\delta}(a,b),&a>b,\end{array}\right.
where
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
a
,
b
)
=
О¶
1
вҲ’
Оҙ
2
вҖӢ
ПҖ
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
x
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
вҲ’
a
2
+
b
2
2
)
вҖӢ
вҲ«
0
2
вҖӢ
ПҖ
c
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
(
Оҙ
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
w
вҲ’
О¶
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
w
1
вҲ’
2
вҖӢ
О¶
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
w
+
О¶
2
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
x
вҖӢ
p
вҖӢ
(
a
вҖӢ
b
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
w
)
вҖӢ
рқ‘‘
w
H_{\delta}(a,b)=\frac{\zeta^{1-\delta}}{2\pi}exp(-\frac{a^{2}+b^{2}}{2})\int_{0}^{2\pi}\frac{cos(\delta-1)w-\zeta cos\,\delta\,w}{1-2\zeta cosw+\zeta^{2}}exp(ab\,cos\,w)dw
and
О¶
=
a
/
b
\zeta=a/b
. Then, we get:
Corollary 1:
The local asymptotic power of the GCov specification test is defined as:
ОІ
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
;
Оұ
)
=
Q
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
/
2
вҖӢ
[
О»
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
,
ПҮ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
]
,
\beta(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu;\alpha)=Q_{(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))/2}[\sqrt{\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)},\sqrt{\chi^{2}_{1-\alpha}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))}],
where
О»
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)
is given in Proposition 2.
From the monotonicity property of the Q-function, it follows that the local asymptotic power function is strictly decreasing in the non-centrality parameter
О»
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)
.
4
Bootstrap-Adjusted GCov Test
Even though the asymptotic distribution of the GCov test statistic is known to be a
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution [resp. non-central
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution] under the null hypothesis [resp. local alternatives], and asymptotically valid critical values are available, one may be interested in finding critical values for hypothesis testing in finite samples.
This section describes the bootstrap for GCov test statistic under the regularity conditions given in Appendix B.7.
4.1
Bootstrap Under the Null Hypothesis
We approximate the distribution of
Оҫ
~
T
\tilde{\xi}_{T}
by computing the test statistic
Оҫ
вҖӢ
(
H
,
Оё
^
T
s
,
f
^
T
s
)
\xi(H,\hat{\theta}_{T}^{s},\hat{f}_{T}^{s})
with
Оё
^
T
s
\hat{\theta}^{s}_{T}
and
f
^
T
s
\hat{f}^{s}_{T}
obtained from the bootstrapped residuals, and the bootstrapped values
y
1
s
,
вҖҰ
,
y
T
s
y_{1}^{s},...,y_{T}^{s}
. We assume
Y
~
t
=
(
Y
t
,
Y
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
t
вҲ’
p
)
\tilde{Y}_{t}=(Y_{t},Y_{t-1},...,Y_{t-p})
and denote by
c
c
the inverse of function
g
g
with respect to
y
t
y_{t}
.
Then, the critical value of the test statistic
Оҫ
~
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\tilde{\xi}_{T}(H)
can be found by parametric bootstrap along the following steps:
1. Draw randomly with replacements
T
T
residuals
u
^
T
,
t
s
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t}^{s},t=1,...,T
from residuals
u
^
T
,
t
=
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
^
T
)
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t}=g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\hat{\theta}_{T}),t=1,...,T
.
2. Build the bootstrapped time series of length
T
T
:
y
T
,
t
s
=
c
вҖӢ
(
y
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
s
,
вҖҰ
,
y
T
,
t
вҲ’
p
s
,
u
^
T
,
t
s
,
Оё
^
T
)
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
y_{T,t}^{s}=c(y^{s}_{T,t-1},...,y^{s}_{T,t-p},\hat{u}_{T,t}^{s},\hat{\theta}_{T}),t=1,...,T,\;s=1,...,S
8
8
8
with the starting values
y
T
,
вҲ’
1
s
=
y
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
y
T
,
вҲ’
p
=
y
вҲ’
p
y_{T,-1}^{s}=y_{-1},...,y_{T,-p}=y_{-p}
, if the stationary process is causal and such that
u
t
u_{t}
is independent of
y
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
y
t
вҲ’
p
вҖӢ
вҲҖ
t
y_{t-1},...,y_{t-p}\forall t
. If the process is a mixed VAR, the bootstrapped values
y
1
s
,
вҖҰ
,
y
T
s
y_{1}^{s},...,y_{T}^{s}
can be computed from
u
^
T
,
t
s
\hat{u}_{T,t}^{s}
using the formulas in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2017). For a VAR model in a multiplicative representation, see Lanne and Saikkonen (2013). For univariate MAR(r,s) processes, see Gourieroux and Jasiak (2016) and Section 6.1.
.
3. Re-estimate the parameter vector
Оё
\theta
by GCov from
y
T
,
t
s
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
y_{T,t}^{s},\;t=1,...,T
, providing
Оё
^
T
s
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
\hat{\theta}_{T}^{s},\;s=1,...,S
. Under the regularity conditions discussed in Appendix B.7, the asymptotic distribution of
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
s
вҲ’
Оё
^
T
)
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}^{s}-\hat{\theta}_{T})
conditional on the sample
y
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
y_{t},t=1,...,T
is the same as the asymptotic distribution
of
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}-\theta_{0})
.
4. Compute the test statistic
Оҫ
^
T
s
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}^{s}(H)
from
u
^
T
,
t
s
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t}^{s},t=1,...,T
, their nonlinear transforms and
Оё
^
T
s
\hat{\theta}_{T}^{s}
.
5. Rank the test statistics
Оҫ
^
T
s
вҖӢ
(
H
)
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
\hat{\xi}^{s}_{T}(H),\;s=1,...,S
, and use the 95th percentile
q
^
T
,
95
%
\hat{q}_{T,95\%}
, say, as the critical value for testing
the null hypothesis of absence of nonlinear or linear serial dependence.
Then, the null hypothesis is rejected if:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
>
q
^
T
,
95
%
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)>\hat{q}_{T,95\%},
and it is not rejected, otherwise. Henceforth, the bootstrap size-adjusted test is called the GCov bootstrap test.
4.2
Bootstrap Analysis of the Local Power of Test
The bootstrap can also be used to obtain an approximation of the local power of the size-adjusted GCov bootstrap test (see Escanciano (2007), Sections 2.3 and 3). The approach involves two types of bootstrap performed under the null and under the alternative, respectively. The local power approximation is obtained as follows:
Step 1: Estimate the model
g
(
y
~
t
,
Оё
,
Оі
)
=
u
t
,
t
=
1
,
.
.
,
T
g(\tilde{y}_{t},\theta,\gamma)=u_{t},\;t=1,..,T
under the alternative to get
Оё
^
1
,
T
,
Оі
^
1
,
T
\hat{\theta}_{1,T},\hat{\gamma}_{1,T}
.
Step 2: Compute the residuals under the alternative:
u
^
1
,
T
,
t
=
g
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
Оё
^
1
,
T
,
Оі
^
1
,
T
)
\hat{u}_{1,T,t}=g(y_{t},\hat{\theta}_{1,T},\hat{\gamma}_{1,T})
.
Step 3: Get the bootstrapped residuals
u
^
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
\hat{u}_{1,b,T,t}^{s}
by drawing in the sample distribution of
u
^
1
,
T
,
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{1,T,t},t=1,...,T
for
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
s=1,...,S
.
Step 4: Calculate the bootstrapped pseudo-observations
y
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
y_{1,b,T,t}^{s}
from
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
;
Оё
^
1
,
T
,
Оі
^
1
,
T
)
=
u
^
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
.
g(\tilde{y}_{1,b,T,t}^{s};\hat{\theta}_{1,T},\hat{\gamma}_{1,T})=\hat{u}_{1,b,T,t}^{s},\;s=1,...,S.
вҮ”
y
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
=
c
вҖӢ
(
y
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
s
,
вҖҰ
,
y
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
вҲ’
p
s
,
u
^
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
,
Оё
^
1
,
T
,
Оі
^
1
,
T
)
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
.
\iff y_{1,b,T,t}^{s}=c(y_{1,b,T,t-1}^{s},...,y_{1,b,T,t-p}^{s},\hat{u}_{1,b,T,t}^{s},\hat{\theta}_{1,T},\hat{\gamma}_{1,T}),\;s=1,...,S.
Step 5: From
y
1
,
b
,
T
,
t
s
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
y_{1,b,T,t}^{s},t=1,...,T
bootstrapped under the alternative, compute the values of the estimates
Оё
^
0
,
b
,
T
s
\hat{\theta}_{0,b,T}^{s}
of
Оё
\theta
under the null and the associated test statistic
Оҫ
^
0
,
b
,
T
s
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
\hat{\xi}_{0,b,T}^{s},s=1,...,S
. Let the test statistic computed under the null be denoted by
Оҫ
^
0
,
T
\hat{\xi}_{0,T}
.
Then, the empirical distribution of
Оҫ
^
0
,
b
,
T
s
вҲ’
Оҫ
^
0
,
T
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
\hat{\xi}_{0,b,T}^{s}-\hat{\xi}_{0,T},s=1,...,S
approximates the distribution of
Оҫ
^
0
,
T
\hat{\xi}_{0,T}
under the local alternative.
Step 6: Evaluate the bootstrapped local power of the (size-adjusted) GCov bootstrap test as:
1
вҲ’
F
^
b
,
T
s
вҖӢ
(
q
^
T
,
95
%
)
1-\hat{F}_{b,T}^{s}(\hat{q}_{T,95\%})
, where
F
^
b
,
T
s
вҖӢ
(
Оұ
)
\hat{F}_{b,T}^{s}(\alpha)
denotes
the bootstrap c.d.f. under the alternative and
q
^
T
,
95
%
\hat{q}_{T,95\%}
is defined in Section 4.1.
4.3
An Extended Continuous Updating GMM
To discuss the relationship with the current literature on bootstrap applied to overidentification tests based on moment conditions, we consider a comparable extension of the Continuous Updating GMM (CUGMM) estimator. This extended CUGMM estimates an additional vector of parameters
ОІ
\beta
that is needed to center each moment condition based on nonlinear transformations in order to obtain moment conditions equivalent to nonlinear autocovariance conditions of the GCov.
For ease of exposition, we assume that
H
=
1
H=1
and enlarge the parameter set to
Оё
,
ОІ
\theta,\beta
, where
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
ОІ
)
=
K
dim(\beta)=K
. Then the set of centered moment conditions equivalent to zero nonlinear autocovariance conditions is:
E
вҖӢ
[
a
k
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
]
вҲ’
ОІ
k
]
\displaystyle E[a_{k}[g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)]-\beta_{k}]
=
\displaystyle=
0
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
,
\displaystyle 0,\;k=1,...,K,
(4.1)
E
вҖӢ
{
[
a
j
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
]
вҲ’
ОІ
j
]
вҖӢ
[
a
k
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
вҲ’
1
,
Оё
)
]
вҲ’
ОІ
k
]
}
\displaystyle E\{[a_{j}[g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)]-\beta_{j}][a_{k}[g(\tilde{Y}_{t-1},\theta)]-\beta_{k}]\}
=
\displaystyle=
0
,
j
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
.
\displaystyle 0,\;j,k=1,...,K.
This set of moment conditions jointly identifies the parameter
Оё
\theta
and the additional parameter
ОІ
\beta
.
Proposition 3:
i) Under the condition of just-identification,
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
K
2
dim(\theta)=K^{2}
and
H
=
1
H=1
, the extended CUGMM concentrated in
ОІ
\beta
and applied to the set of moment conditions (4.1) yields the estimators
Оё
^
T
,
ОІ
^
T
\hat{\theta}_{T},\hat{\beta}_{T}
and the objective function
Оҫ
^
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
,
ОІ
^
T
)
\hat{\xi}^{*}_{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T},\hat{\beta}_{T})
such that
Оё
^
T
\hat{\theta}_{T}
is equal to the GCov estimator of
Оё
\theta
, and the minimum of
Оҫ
^
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
,
ОІ
^
T
)
\hat{\xi}^{*}_{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T},\hat{\beta}_{T})
is equal to the minimum value of zero of the GCov objective function.
ii) Under overidentification,
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
<
K
2
dim(\theta)<K^{2}
, the GCov and the concentrated extended CUGMM estimators of
Оё
\theta
are equivalent at order
1
/
T
1/\sqrt{T}
and differ at order
1
/
T
1/T
. The associated test statistics have the same asymptotic chi-square distributions at the first order, but differ at higher orders.
Proof:
i) If
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
K
2
dim(\theta)=K^{2}
, due to the just identification of
ОІ
\beta
for a given
Оё
\theta
, we can concentrate
ОІ
\beta
out of the CUGMM objective function by using:
ОІ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
a
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
]
.
\hat{\beta}_{T}(\theta)=\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}a[g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)].
Next, after substituting
ОІ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
\hat{\beta}_{T}(\theta)
into the CUGMM objective function, we find that at the minimum, the concentrated objective function of the extended CUGMM is equal to the minimum of the GCov objective function. The result follows.
ii) Under the overidentification, the asymptotic distribution of
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}-\theta_{0})
is normal, and both estimators are semi-parametrically efficient for the given set of autocovariance conditions and have the same asymptotic variance. This implies a common chi-square distribution of test statistics at the first order. The asymptotic Taylor expansions of The GCov and extended concentrated CUGMM estimators show a difference in asymptotic biases at order
1
/
T
1/T
due to different weighting, which implies that these estimators differ at order
1
/
T
1/T
.
QED.
When the lag
H
H
is increased to
H
>
1
H>1
and higher, the dimensions of the set of moment conditions and of the weighting matrix in the objective function of the extended CUGMM increase by a factor
K
вҖӢ
H
KH
. In practice, this may cause an invertibility issue, which will not arise in the GCov where the dimensions of the objective function remain unchanged when
H
H
increases.
Since the GCov and extended concentrated CUGMM estimators differ asymptotically by the bias at order
1
/
T
1/T
, and the bootstrap methods applied to the above estimators are expected to adjust for these biases, sufficient regularity conditions for the validity of the bootstrap for the GCov and extended concentrated CUGMM, respectively, will be the same [see Dovonon and Goncalves (2017)].  An important difference arises when the set of moment conditions increases to infinity [see Section 5]. Then, the number of parameters
ОІ
\beta
in the extended CUGMM
tends to infinity too, which is at odds with the results established in the literature on CUGMM with an infinite set of moment conditions and a parameter of fixed dimension.
5
Increasing the Set of Autocovariance Conditions
The GCov estimator has been applied so far using a finite set of zero nonlinear autocovariance conditions, that is, a given order
H
H
and a given set of
K
K
nonlinear error transformations.
In this section,
we discuss how the asymptotic performance of the GCov specification test can be improved by increasing the set of nonlinear transformations denoted by
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
and possibly by taking into account an infinite set of autocovariance conditions.
5.1
Implicit Null and Alternative Hypotheses
Let us compare the implicit null and alternative hypotheses considered with those of potential interest. We distinguish the following hypotheses concerning the parameter
Оё
\theta
and the distribution
f
f
of the process
(
u
t
)
(u_{t})
9
9
9
As in previous sections, we assume a well-specified model (3.1):
u
t
=
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
)
u_{t}=g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\theta)
and the true value
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
of
Оё
\theta
. To simplify the notation, the same symbol
u
t
u_{t}
is used for errors that depend on either
Оё
\theta
or
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
.
:
i)
H
0
,
рқ’ң
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
C
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
[
a
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
,
a
~
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҲ’
h
)
]
=
0
,
вҲҖ
h
,
вҲҖ
a
,
a
~
вҲҲ
рқ’ң
}
H_{0,\mathcal{A}}=\{\theta,f:Cov[a(u_{t}),{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\tilde{a}}(u_{t-h})]=0,\;\forall h,\;\forall a,{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\tilde{a}}\in\mathcal{A}\}
and the associated alternative
H
1
,
рқ’ң
H_{1,\mathcal{A}}
. These hypotheses depend on the selected set of scalar transformations
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
.
ii)
H
0
,
p
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
r
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
u
t
,
and
вҖӢ
u
t
вҲ’
h
вҖӢ
are independent
,
вҲҖ
h
}
H_{0,pair}=\{\theta,f:u_{t},\;\mbox{and}\;u_{t-h}\;\mbox{are independent},\;\forall h\}
and its alternative
H
1
,
p
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
r
H_{1,pair}
.
iii)
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
t
вҲ’
h
вҖӢ
are independent
вҖӢ
вҲҖ
t
,
h
}
H_{0,ind}=\{\theta,f:u_{t},u_{t-1},...,u_{t-h}\;\mbox{are independent}\;\forall t,h\}
and its alternative
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
H_{1,ind}
.
iv)
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
=
{
Оё
,
f
:
u
t
вҖІ
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
are iid
}
H_{0,iid}=\{\theta,f:u_{t}^{\prime}s\;\mbox{are iid}\}
and its alternative
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{1,iid}
.
We have
H
0
,
рқ’ң
вҠғ
H
0
,
p
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
r
вҠғ
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
вҠғ
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{0,\mathcal{A}}\supset H_{0,pair}\supset H_{0,ind}\supset H_{0,iid}
and
H
1
,
рқ’ң
вҠӮ
H
1
,
p
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
r
вҠӮ
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
вҠӮ
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{1,\mathcal{A}}\subset H_{1,pair}\subset H_{1,ind}\subset H_{1,iid}
.
The test of
H
0
,
рқ’ң
H_{0,\mathcal{A}}
is consistent and of asymptotic power of 1 against
H
1
,
рқ’ң
H_{1,\mathcal{A}}
. However, this test is not of asymptotic power 1 against
H
1
,
p
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
r
,
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
n
вҖӢ
d
H_{1,pair},H_{1,ind}
and
H
1
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{1,iid}
.
By increasing the set of nonlinear transformations
a
a
in
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
appropriately, we expect to improve the asymptotic efficiency of the GCov estimator and to increase the set of alternatives against which the GCov specification test is asymptotically consistent.
5.2
The Semi-Parametric Efficiency Bound
The asymptotic performance of the GCov specification test depends on the asymptotic properties of the GCov estimator of parameter
Оё
\theta
.
We can distinguish the semi-parametric models and the associated semi-parametric efficiency bounds, which are:
i) The semi-parametric efficiency bound that accounts for the pairwise independence between
u
t
u_{t}
and
u
t
вҲ’
h
u_{t-h}
for any
h
h
.
ii) The semi-parametric efficiency bound that takes into account the joint independence of
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
t
вҲ’
h
u_{t},u_{t-1},...,u_{t-h}
, since the pairwise independence does not imply the joint independence.
iii) The semi-parametric efficiency bound that takes into account the fact that the
u
t
u_{t}
вҖҷs are identically distributed. It coincides with the parametric efficiency bound, as shown
in Example 6.
The GCov estimator attains the first semi-parametric efficiency bound i), but not the parametric efficiency bound under
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{0,iid}
, which requires a two-step estimator illustrated below.
Example 6: Adaptive Estimator
Let
Оё
^
T
\hat{\theta}_{T}
denote a GCov estimator based on a finite set
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
of nonlinear transformations. Given this consistent estimator, we can compute the residuals
u
^
T
,
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t},t=1,...,T
of the model and then approximate nonparametrically the true density
f
0
f_{0}
of
u
t
u_{t}
by the kernel-based density
f
^
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
\hat{f}_{T}(u)
based on the residuals
u
^
T
,
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t},t=1,...,T
.
Next, in the second step, parameter
Оё
\theta
can be estimated by a pseudo-maximum likelihood method, where the true density
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
f_{0}(u)
is replaced by
f
^
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
\hat{f}_{T}(u)
[see e.g., Bickel (1982) and Newey (1988)]. Under standard regularity conditions, this leads to a two-step estimator of
Оё
\theta
that reaches the parametric efficiency bound. Due to this improvement of the asymptotic properties of the GCov estimator, the pseudo-likelihood ratio test based on this two-step estimator has better asymptotic power properties than the GCov test based on a finite set
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
.
5.3
How to Choose an Infinite Set of Transformations
The asymptotic properties of the GCov estimator and of the associated test statistics can be improved by increasing the finite set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions to a larger finite or infinite set.
The extension to an infinite set is easy when these conditions correspond to an orthonormal basis of the Hilbert space
L
2
вҖӢ
(
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
)
L^{2}(u_{t},u_{t-1},...)
. In our framework, we can increase the set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions by increasing the maximum lag
H
H
, or the set of transformations
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
. We saw that, under the null hypothesis, the orthogonality of nonlinear autocovariance conditions with respect to the lag is satisfied. This explains the simplified form of the test statistic written as a sum of terms associated with lags
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
h=1,...,H
.
In contrast, the set of nonlinear transformations does not necessarily correspond to an orthonormal basis, and inverting the variance matrix of a large dimension can become a problem from both the theoretical and computational perspectives.
We follow the approach of Bierens (1990) and build a sequence of orthonormal bases in
L
2
вҖӢ
(
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
t
вҲ’
H
)
L^{2}(u_{t},u_{t-1},...,u_{t-H})
of square-integrable transformations of
(
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
t
вҲ’
H
)
(u_{t},u_{t-1},...,u_{t-H})
(or, equivalently in
L
2
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
L^{2}(u_{t})
). We proceed as follows:
1. Consider a countable subset of transformations
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
, called a system of generators, that allows identifying the unknown distribution
f
0
f_{0}
of
u
t
u_{t}
;
2. Select from that set
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
an increasing sequence of finite subsets of transformations
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
, such that
вӢғ
n
рқ’ң
n
\bigcup_{n}\mathcal{A}_{n}
is dense;
3. Orthonormalize within each subset;
(See Bierens (1990), Corollary 1 for the system of generators based on exponential transforms). In practice, it is difficult to find a system of generators that is informative about
Оё
\theta
.
An important feature of the causal-noncausal models considered in our paper is the presence of extreme risks and persistence, creating locally explosive patterns, including spikes and bubbles. This implies that the model errors do not necessarily have higher power moments. Moreover, some parameters driving the tails of their distributions, including those distinguishing between the negative and positive tails, may be non-identifiable
from the transformations
u
t
вҖӢ
u
t
вҖІ
u_{t}u_{t}^{\prime}
only.
In this respect, some standard linear systems of generators are not convenient. For example, the polynomial transformations of
u
t
u_{t}
cannot be used if
u
t
u_{t}
has no moments of order greater than 3. Moreover, the sine-cosine transformations used in the ADCV literature may not be informative of the tail driving parameters [see, e.g., Wan and Davis (2022), Fokianos and Pitsillou (2018) for the ADCV test of the independence hypothesis based on a joint characteristic function]. The same remark applies to the standard spline bases.
A preferred system of generators would assign weights to the power transformations, ensuring their square integrability. For ease of exposition, consider a univariate process with positive errors
u
t
u_{t}
and with trajectories admitting only positive and increasing bubbles caused by a large positive shock to
u
t
u_{t}
10
10
10
The extension to a multivariate
u
t
u_{t}
is done by finding the products of generators for univariate
u
t
u_{t}
вҖҷs.
. Then, a countable linear system of generators is:
рқ’ң
=
{
a
t
,
p
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
u
p
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
u
)
,
p
вҲҲ
в„•
,
t
вҲҲ
рқ’¬
вҠӮ
[
0
,
1
]
}
,
\mathcal{A}=\{a_{t,p}(u)=u^{p}\exp(-tu),\;p\in{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\mathbb{N}},\;t\in\mathcal{Q}\subset[0,1]\},
where
рқ’¬
\mathcal{Q}
is the set of rational numbers, with an increasing sequence of finite subsets given by:
рқ’ң
n
=
{
a
t
j
,
n
,
p
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
u
p
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
j
,
n
вҖӢ
u
)
,
p
вҲҲ
в„•
,
t
j
,
n
вҲҲ
рқ’¬
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
вҖӢ
n
}
,
\mathcal{A}_{n}=\{a_{t_{j},n,{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}p}}(u)=u^{p}\exp(-t_{j,n}u),\;p\in{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\mathbb{N}},\;t_{j,n}\in\mathcal{Q},\;j=1,...n\},
where
(
t
1
,
n
,
вҖҰ
,
t
j
,
n
)
(t_{1,n},...,t_{j,n})
are the elements of a grid that is getting finer as
n
n
increases.
We observe that the sequence
{
рқ’ң
n
}
\{\mathcal{A}_{n}\}
is such that
вӢғ
n
рқ’ң
n
\bigcup_{n}\mathcal{A}_{n}
is dense in
L
2
L^{2}
and allows identifying the distribution of
u
u
, based on the inversion formula of the real Laplace transform called PostвҖҷs inversion formula [Post (1930), and Feller (1971), Chapter 13, for the modern proof]. We make the following assumption:
Assumption 1:
U
U
is positive and has a distribution with continuous density
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
f_{0}(u)
such that:
sup
u
>
0
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
/
exp
вҒЎ
(
b
вҖӢ
u
)
<
вҲһ
\sup_{u>0}f_{0}(u)/\exp(bu)<\infty
, for some
b
>
0
b>0
.
This condition on the density function implies that the distribution cannot have a large probability mass at zero, and its right tail can be of any size.
Under Assumption 1, the Laplace transform:
ОЁ
вҖӢ
(
t
)
=
E
вҖӢ
[
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
U
)
]
\Psi(t)=E[\exp(-tU)]
,
t
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
t\in[0,1]
characterizes the distribution of
U
U
.
However, as mentioned earlier
рқ’ң
вҲ—
=
{
a
t
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
u
)
,
t
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
}
\mathcal{A}^{*}=\{a_{t}(u)=\exp(-tu),\;t\in[0,1]\}
is not a convenient system of generators, because we may not be able to write
f
0
f_{0}
as the limit of linear combinations of decreasing exponentials. A better system of generators follows from the PostвҖҷs inversion formula.
Proposition 4: PostвҖҷs inversion formula [Post (1930)]
Under Assumption 1, we have:
f
0
вҖӢ
(
v
)
=
lim
n
вҶ’
вҲһ
1
n
!
вҖӢ
(
n
v
)
n
+
1
вҖӢ
E
вҖӢ
[
U
n
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
n
v
вҖӢ
U
)
]
,
вҲҖ
v
,
a
.
e
.
f_{0}(v)=\lim_{n\rightarrow\infty}\frac{1}{n!}\left(\frac{n}{v}\right)^{n+1}E[U^{n}\exp\left(-\frac{n}{v}U\right)],\;\forall v,\;a.e.
This suggests the linear system of generators:
рқ’ң
=
{
a
t
,
p
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
u
p
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
u
)
,
p
вҲҲ
в„•
,
t
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
}
,
\mathcal{A}=\{a_{t,p}(u)=u^{p}\exp(-tu),\;p\in\mathbb{N},t\in[0,1]\},
where the power transforms are weighted by decreasing exponentials to ensure their square integrability, and the associated sequence given by:
рқ’ң
n
=
{
a
t
j
,
n
,
p
(
u
)
=
u
p
exp
(
вҲ’
t
j
,
n
u
)
,
p
вҲҲ
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
}
,
t
j
,
n
вҲҲ
рқ’¬
вҠӮ
[
0
,
1
]
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
}
.
\mathcal{A}_{n}=\{a_{t_{j,n},p}(u)=u^{p}\exp(-t_{j,n}u),\;p\in\{1,...,n\},t_{j,n}\in\mathcal{Q}\subset[0,1],\;j=1,...,n\}.
In practice, only weights with
t
t
close to 0 are useful. To see that, let us recall that the real Laplace transform
ОЁ
\Psi
of a positive variable is characterized by its Taylor series expansion:
E
вҖӢ
[
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
U
)
]
=
вҲ‘
j
=
0
вҲһ
t
j
j
!
вҖӢ
Ој
j
.
E[\exp(-tU)]=\sum_{j=0}^{\infty}\frac{t^{j}}{j!}\mu_{j}.
If
U
U
admits power moments of any order, we have
Ој
j
=
E
вҖӢ
(
U
j
)
,
вҲҖ
j
\mu_{j}=E(U^{j}),\;\forall j
. In our framework of heavy-tailed
U
U
, such moments may not exist, but regardless, this series expansion exists and TaylorвҖҷs coefficients
Ој
3
,
Ој
4
\mu_{3},\mu_{4}
define new notions of skewness and kurtosis measures.
Remark 5:
In practice, the PostвҖҷs inversion formula does not provide a tractable means of inverting the Laplace transform, and it is an ill-posed problem [see Bryan (2006), Conclusion]. In this respect, the regularized GCov estimator introduced later in this section can be seen as a solution to this ill-posed problem when the goal is to estimate
Оё
\theta
.
We use PostвҖҷs inversion formula only to show that
рқ’ң
\mathcal{A}
is an adequate linear system of generators.
Remark 6:
Similar results can be obtained if additional information is available on the size of the tail of the distribution of
U
U
, like, for example, the tails are Pareto. Then, we can apply the Hardy-Littlewood Tauberian theorem with a Pareto weighting function to define an alternative system of generators [Feller (1971)].
Remark 7:
The causal-noncausal MAR(r,s) processes are often applied to positive time series, such as commodity prices. Then, their solutions have a two-sided moving average representation
y
t
=
вҲ‘
j
=
вҲ’
вҲһ
вҲһ
c
j
вҖӢ
u
t
вҲ’
j
y_{t}=\sum_{j=-\infty}^{\infty}c_{j}u_{t-j}
in errors taking values in
(
0
,
вҲһ
)
(0,\infty)
. The positivity restriction on process
(
y
t
)
(y_{t})
implies that
c
j
вүҘ
0
,
вҲҖ
j
c_{j}\geq 0,\forall j
, and
u
t
вүҘ
0
,
вҲҖ
t
u_{t}\geq 0,\forall t
(up to sign identification), validating the assumption
U
>
0
U>0
. If the error
u
t
u_{t}
takes both positive and negative values, we can
observe вҖқpositiveвҖқ and вҖқnegativeвҖқ bubbles. Then, the weights have to be replaced by
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
|
U
|
)
\exp(-t|U|)
, and the even and odd powers of
U
U
have to take positive or negative signs, respectively. If
u
t
u_{t}
has a symmetric distribution, the generators become
a
t
,
p
=
|
u
|
p
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
вҖӢ
|
u
|
)
a_{t,p}=|u|^{p}\exp(-t|u|)
.
5.4
Regularized Orthonormalization of the System of Generators
It is impossible to construct an exact orthonormal basis from a system of generators because the true distribution of
U
U
under the i.i.d. hypothesis is unknown. Hence, a two-step approach is required. We derive below the orthonormalization in the multidimensional case and discuss the form of the portmanteau statistic and its asymptotic distribution in the following subsection. The empirical orthonormalization in the spirit of the Gram-Schmidt forward regression [Chen et al. (2025)] proceeds in the following steps:
step 1. Consider a finite set
рқ’ң
0
\mathcal{A}_{0}
of transformations from which
Оё
\theta
is identifiable. Estimate
Оё
\theta
by
a consistent estimator
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
and compute
u
^
T
,
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t},\;t=1,...,T
.
step 2. Consider an infinite set
рқ’ң
=
{
a
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
u
1
p
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
J
p
J
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
П„
вҖІ
вҖӢ
u
)
,
p
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
J
вҲҲ
рқ’©
,
П„
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
J
}
\mathcal{A}=\{a(u)=u_{1}^{p_{1}},...,u_{J}^{p_{J}}\exp(-\tau^{\prime}u),\;p_{1},...,p_{J}\in\mathcal{N},\;\tau\in[0,1]^{J}\}
and the increasing sequence of finite sets
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
:
рқ’ң
n
=
{
a
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
u
1
p
1
,
вҖҰ
,
u
J
p
J
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
П„
j
,
n
вҖІ
вҖӢ
u
)
,
p
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
J
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
,
вҖҰ
,
P
n
)
,
П„
1
,
n
,
вҖҰ
,
П„
n
,
n
вҲҲ
[
0
,
1
]
J
}
,
\mathcal{A}_{n}=\{a(u)=u_{1}^{p_{1}},...,u_{J}^{p_{J}}\exp(-\tau_{j,n}^{\prime}u),\;p_{1},...,p_{J}\in(0,1,...,P_{n}),\;\tau_{1,n},...,\tau_{n,n}\in[0,1]^{J}\},
where
вӢғ
n
(
П„
1
,
n
,
вҖҰ
,
П„
n
,
n
)
\bigcup_{n}(\tau_{1,n},...,\tau_{n,n})
is dense in
[
0
,
1
]
J
[0,1]^{J}
when
n
вҶ’
вҲһ
n\rightarrow\infty
.
The number of transformations in
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
is
P
n
J
вҖӢ
J
n
P_{n}^{J}J^{n}
, where
K
n
вүЎ
P
n
J
вҖӢ
J
n
K_{n}\equiv P_{n}^{J}J^{n}
with the elements
a
k
,
n
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
a_{k,n},k=1,...,K_{n}
arranged in an increasing order:
рқ’ң
n
=
{
a
k
,
n
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
=
P
n
J
J
n
}
\mathcal{A}_{n}=\{a_{k,n},\;k=1,...,K_{n}=P_{n}^{J}J^{n}\}
.
step 3. (Regularized) Orthonormalization
The mapping of
a
k
,
n
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
P
n
J
вҖӢ
J
n
a_{k,n},\;k=1,...,P_{n}^{J}J^{n}
into an orthonormal basis
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
a_{k,n}^{*},\;k=1,...,K_{n}
is obtained as follows. We run regressions to get at step
n
n
the orthonormal functions
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
a_{k,n}^{*},\;k=1,...,K_{n}
, with zero mean.
a) We start from regressing
a
1
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
a_{1,n}(\hat{u}_{T,t})
on the constant:
a
1
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
=
Оұ
1
,
n
,
T
+
w
^
1
,
n
,
T
,
t
,
a_{1,n}(\hat{u}_{T,t})=\alpha_{1,n,T}+\hat{w}_{1,n,T,t},
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
t=1,...,T
with the residuals
w
^
1
,
n
,
T
,
t
\hat{w}_{1,n,T,t}
. Next, compute:
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
w
^
1
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
/
вҖ–
w
^
1
,
n
,
T
вҖ–
T
,
a_{1,n,T}^{*}(u)=\hat{w}_{1,n,T}(u)/||\hat{w}_{1,n,T}||_{T},
where
w
^
1
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
a
1
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
)
вҲ’
Оұ
1
,
n
,
T
\hat{w}_{1,n,T}(u)=a_{1,n}(u)-\alpha_{1,n,T}
. Let
R
1
,
n
,
T
2
R^{2}_{1,n,T}
denote the R-square in the above regression. Then
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
a_{1,n,T}^{*}
is used if
1
вҲ’
R
1
,
n
,
T
2
1-R^{2}_{1,n,T}
is sufficiently different from 0, i.e.,
1
вҲ’
R
1
,
n
,
T
2
>
Пө
n
,
T
1-R^{2}_{1,n,T}>\epsilon_{n,T}
, where
Пө
n
,
T
\epsilon_{n,T}
is an appropriately chosen regularization tuning parameter [The regularization through tuning parameters is an empirical analogue of the theoretical condition in the proof of Corollary 1 in Bierens (1990)]. Otherwise, disregard
a
1
,
n
a_{1,n}
and start from
a
2
,
n
a_{2,n}
.
b) In the next step,
a
2
,
n
a_{2,n}
is projected on
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
a_{1,n,T}^{*}
as follows. We run the regression:
a
2
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
=
Оұ
2
,
n
,
T
+
ОІ
2
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
+
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
,
t
,
a_{2,n}(\hat{u}_{T,t})=\alpha_{2,n,T}+\beta_{2,n,T}a_{1,n,T}^{*}(\hat{u}_{T,t})+\hat{w}_{2,n,T,t},
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
t=1,...,T
with the residuals
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
,
t
\hat{w}_{2,n,T,t}
. Next, compute:
a
2
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
/
вҖ–
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
вҖ–
T
,
a_{2,n,T}^{*}(u)=\hat{w}_{2,n,T}(u)/||\hat{w}_{2,n,T}||_{T},
where
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
a
2
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
)
вҲ’
Оұ
2
,
n
,
T
вҲ’
ОІ
2
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
)
\hat{w}_{2,n,T}(u)=a_{2,n}(u)-\alpha_{2,n,T}-\beta_{2,n,T}a^{*}_{1,n,T}(u)
. This can be done if
вҖ–
w
^
2
,
n
,
T
вҖ–
T
||\hat{w}_{2,n,T}||_{T}
is sufficiently different from 0, which is the case when
1
вҲ’
R
2
,
n
,
T
2
>
Пө
n
,
T
1-R^{2}_{2,n,T}>\epsilon_{n,T}
. Otherwise, proceed with
a
3
,
n
a_{3,n}
instead.
c) The third step is
a
3
,
n
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
=
Оұ
3
,
n
,
T
+
ОІ
3
,
1
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
a
1
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
+
ОІ
3
,
2
,
n
,
T
вҖӢ
a
2
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
+
w
^
3
,
n
,
T
,
t
,
a_{3,n}(\hat{u}_{T,t})=\alpha_{3,n,T}+\beta_{3,1,n,T}a_{1,n,T}^{*}(\hat{u}_{T,t})+\beta_{3,2,n,T}a_{2,n,T}^{*}(\hat{u}_{T,t})+\hat{w}_{3,n,T,t},
and so on, up to
k
=
K
n
k=K_{n}
.
We end up with a selected set of transformations
рқ’ң
n
вҲ—
=
{
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
вҲ—
}
\mathcal{A}_{n}^{*}=\{a_{k,n}^{*},k=1,...,K_{n}^{*}\}
, which are zero mean and orthonormal with respect to the sample distribution of
u
^
T
,
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
\hat{u}_{T,t},\;t=1,...,T
, and a random
K
n
вҲ—
K_{n}^{*}
, such that
K
n
вҲ—
вүӨ
K
n
K_{n}^{*}\leq K_{n}
.
Since the autocovariance conditions concern pairs
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
h
u_{t},u_{t-h}
and transformations of type
a
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
,
a
~
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҲ’
h
)
a(u_{t}),{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}\tilde{a}(u_{t-h})}
, we need to consider transformations in
рқ’ң
n
2
\mathcal{A}_{n}^{2}
, where
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
рқ’ң
n
2
)
=
P
n
2
вҖӢ
J
вҖӢ
J
2
вҖӢ
n
=
K
n
2
dim(\mathcal{A}_{n}^{2})=P_{n}^{2J}J^{2n}=K_{n}^{2}
.
The above regularized orthonormalization depends on the estimator
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
of
Оё
\theta
selected in the first step. In practice, we can consider either: a)
Оё
~
n
,
T
=
Оё
^
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}=\hat{\theta}_{n,T}
equal to the GCov estimator, or b)
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
, which is a Diagonal GCov estimator with
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
\hat{\Gamma}(0)
replaced by a matrix containing only the diagonal elements
of
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
\hat{\Gamma}(0)
in the objective function [Gourieroux and Jasiak (2017)]. For a large number of transformations, the Diagonal GCov estimator can be easily computed, while the GCov estimator becomes computationally challenging.
5.5
Two-step Portmanteau Statistic and its Asymptotic Distribution
The orthonormalization simplifies the expression of the objective function and/or facilitates the derivation of the asymptotic distribution of the GCov specification test statistics. The orthonormalization approach outlined in Section 5.4 provides an identity weighting matrix, so that the resulting objective function has the following expression:
L
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
вҲ‘
j
=
1
K
n
вҲ‘
k
=
1
K
n
(
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
+
h
T
a
j
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
]
вҖӢ
a
k
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
вҲ’
h
;
Оё
)
]
)
2
,
L_{n,T}(\theta)=\sum_{h=1}^{H}\sum_{j=1}^{K_{n}}\sum_{k=1}^{K_{n}}\left(\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1+h}^{T}a_{j,n,T}^{*}[g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)]a_{k,n,T}^{*}[g(\tilde{y}_{t-h};\theta)]\right)^{2},
(5.1)
and
Оҫ
^
n
,
T
=
T
вҖӢ
L
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
\hat{\xi}_{n,T}=TL_{n,T}(\theta)
, since the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix is equal to the identity matrix. Note that the transformations
a
j
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
a_{j,n,T}^{*}
depend on the starting values
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
.
Below, we examine two types of GCov test statistics,
depending on the initial value
Оё
^
n
,
T
\hat{\theta}_{n,T}
, or
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
used in the orthonormalization algorithm. Then, the GCov test statistics based on the minimizers of (5.1) are:
Оҫ
^
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
A
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
Оё
вҖӢ
L
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
Оё
^
n
,
T
)
)
вүЎ
Оҫ
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
^
n
,
T
|
Оё
^
n
,
T
)
вҖӢ
and
вҖӢ
Оҫ
~
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
A
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
n
Оё
вҖӢ
L
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
|
Оё
~
n
,
T
)
)
вүЎ
Оҫ
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
~
~
n
,
T
|
Оё
~
n
,
T
)
,
\hat{\xi}_{n,T}(Argmin_{\theta}\,L_{n,T}(\theta|\hat{\theta}_{n,T}))\equiv\xi_{n,T}(\hat{\hat{\theta}}_{n,T}|\hat{\theta}_{n,T})\;\mbox{and}\;\tilde{\xi}_{n,T}(Argmin_{\theta}\,L_{n,T}(\theta|\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}))\equiv\xi_{n,T}(\tilde{\tilde{\theta}}_{n,T}|\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}),
where
Оё
^
^
n
,
T
\hat{\hat{\theta}}_{n,T}
and
Оё
~
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\tilde{\theta}}_{n,T}
denote the minimizers of the objective function (5.1). Note that
Оё
^
^
n
,
T
\hat{\hat{\theta}}_{n,T}
can be computationally challenging for large
K
K
and different from
Оё
~
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\tilde{\theta}}_{n,T}
, although they are both asymptotically equivalent.
Proposition 5
Under
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{0,iid}
and the regularity conditions given in Appendix B.8, we have:
(
Оҫ
^
n
,
T
вҲ’
H
вҖӢ
K
n
вҲ—
2
)
/
2
вҖӢ
H
вҖӢ
K
n
вҲ—
2
вҶ’
d
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
1
)
вҖӢ
and
вҖӢ
(
Оҫ
~
n
,
T
вҲ’
H
вҖӢ
K
n
вҲ—
2
)
/
2
вҖӢ
H
вҖӢ
K
n
вҲ—
2
вҶ’
d
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
1
)
,
(\hat{\xi}_{n,T}-HK_{n}^{*2})/\sqrt{2HK_{n}^{*2}}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle d}}{{\rightarrow}}N(0,1)\;\mbox{and}\;(\tilde{\xi}_{n,T}-HK_{n}^{*2})/\sqrt{2HK_{n}^{*2}}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle d}}{{\rightarrow}}N(0,1),
when
T
T
and
K
n
K_{n}
tend to infinity,
K
n
6
/
T
K_{n}^{6}/T
tends to 0, and the regularization tuning parameter tends to 0 at a rate such that there exist
Оҙ
1
,
Оҙ
2
\delta_{1},\delta_{2}
,
0
<
Оҙ
1
вүӨ
Оҙ
2
<
1
0<\delta_{1}\leq\delta_{2}<1
with
Оҙ
1
<
E
вҖӢ
K
n
вҲ—
/
K
n
<
Оҙ
2
\delta_{1}<EK_{n}^{*}/K_{n}<\delta_{2}
.
Proof
: See Koenker and Machado (1999) and Appendix B.8.
The conditions on the number of transformations are sufficient conditions for the asymptotic normality [see Koenker and Machado (1999)]. They imply that
K
n
вҲ—
K^{*}_{n}
has to increase with
T
T
, but at a rate slow enough to allow for solving the ill-posed problem due to inversion of the sample autocovariance matrix at lag 0.
The change of asymptotic distribution from
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
вҲ’
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
)
\chi^{2}(K^{2}H-dim(\theta))
for a fixed set of transformations to the normal distribution given above is easy to explain. If the dimension of the parameter is fixed and
K
n
вҲ—
K_{n}^{*}
(and/or
H
n
H_{n}
) tend to infinity when
T
T
increases to infinity, the
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
distribution with an infinite number of degrees of freedom is well approximated by a Gaussian distribution.
Hence, Proposition 5 applies this approximation to a centered and standardized test statistic.
As mentioned earlier, our discussion is focused on the increase of the set
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
of transformations. It would also be possible to increase the maximum lag
H
H
with the number of observations and get a similar result when
T
,
H
,
K
n
T,H,K_{n}
tend to infinity at a rate such that
(
H
вҖӢ
K
n
2
)
/
T
(HK_{n}^{2})/T
tends to zero.
The asymptotic results given above are valid for any choice of sequence
{
рқ’ң
n
}
\{\mathcal{A}_{n}\}
such that
вӢғ
n
рқ’ң
n
\bigcup_{n}\mathcal{A}_{n}
is dense and identifies the true distribution
f
0
f_{0}
, and for any ordering of transformations in
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
. However, the choice of sequence
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
and transformation ordering will have an effect at higher orders and in finite samples.
6
Finite Sample Performance of NLSD, GCov Specification and Bootstrap Tests
This section examines
the finite sample performance of proposed test statistics in selected causal-noncausal autoregressive processes. We perform simulations to study the size and power of a) the NLSD
test (eq. 2.5) to test for the absence of (non)linear serial dependence in time series, b) the GCov specification test (eq. 3.3) in Section 6.1, and c) GCov bootstrap test [Section 4.1] in Section 6.2. Section 6.3 shows an example of the GCov specification test with many nonlinear transformations.
6.1
Simulation Study
We consider univariate causal-noncausal MAR(r,s) processes with i.i.d. errors from a uniform distribution
рқ’°
\cal{U}
[-1,1]
, a Laplace distribution with mean zero and variance one, and a t-student distribution with
ОҪ
\nu
degrees of freedom, called t(
ОҪ
\nu
), with mean zero and variance
ОҪ
/
(
ОҪ
вҲ’
2
)
\nu/(\nu-2)
,
ОҪ
>
2
\nu>2
. We generate these processes in samples of size
T
=
100
,
200
,
500
T=100,200,500
.
6.1.1
Data Generating Process
The simulation method introduced in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2016) is used to generate the MAR(r,s) process (eq.
3.6
) where
r
r
and
s
s
denote the orders of causal and noncausal polynomials, respectively. For
r
=
0
r=0
and
s
=
1
s=1
, we generate MAR(0,1), i.e., the noncausal autoregressive process of order 1:
y
t
=
ПҲ
вҖӢ
y
t
+
1
+
u
t
,
|
ПҲ
|
<
1
.
y_{t}=\psi y_{t+1}+u_{t}\;\;,|\psi|<1.
(6.1)
By setting
r
=
1
r=1
and
s
=
1
s=1
, we generate MAR(1,1) processes defined in equation (3.7).
It follows from Lanne and Saikkonen (2011) that its unobserved components
v
1
,
t
,
v
2
,
t
v_{1,t},v_{2,t}
are defined by:
v
1
,
t
вүЎ
(
1
вҲ’
П•
вҖӢ
L
)
вҖӢ
y
t
вҶ”
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
v
1
,
t
=
u
t
,
v
2
,
t
вүЎ
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
вҶ”
(
1
вҲ’
П•
вҖӢ
L
)
вҖӢ
v
2
,
t
=
u
t
,
v_{1,t}\equiv(1-\phi L)y_{t}\leftrightarrow(1-\psi L^{-1})v_{1,t}=u_{t},\;\;v_{2,t}\equiv(1-\psi L^{-1})y_{t}\leftrightarrow(1-\phi L)v_{2,t}=u_{t},
(6.2)
and can be interpreted as the вҖқcausalвҖқ and вҖқnoncausalвҖқ
components.
Then, the MAR(1,1) process has the following deterministic representations based on these unobserved components, used for the simulation and bootstrapping of
y
t
y_{t}
:
i
)
y
t
=
1
1
вҲ’
П•
вҖӢ
ПҲ
(
П•
v
2
,
t
вҲ’
1
+
v
1
,
t
)
,
i
i
)
y
t
=
1
1
вҲ’
П•
вҖӢ
ПҲ
(
v
2
,
t
+
ПҲ
v
1
,
t
+
1
)
,
i)\,y_{t}=\displaystyle\frac{1}{1-\phi\psi}(\phi v_{2,t-1}+v_{1,t}),\;\;ii)\,y_{t}=\displaystyle\frac{1}{1-\phi\psi}(v_{2,t}+\psi v_{1,t+1}),
(6.3)
where in i)
y
t
y_{t}
is a linear function of the
first lag of
v
2
,
t
v_{2,t}
and of the current value of
v
1
,
t
v_{1,t}
, and in ii)
y
t
y_{t}
is a linear function of the
current value of
v
2
,
t
v_{2,t}
and of the
first lag of
v
1
,
t
v_{1,t}
.
Figure
1
shows examples of trajectories of the MAR(1,1) processes simulated with the three error distributions given above and the coefficients
П•
=
0.2
\phi=0.2
and
ПҲ
=
0.8
\psi=0.8
satisfying the strict stationarity condition.
We observe that a large error value creates a spike in the trajectory of MAR(1,1) with explosion and collapse rates determined by coefficients
ПҲ
\psi
and
П•
\phi
, respectively.
(a)
u
t
вҲј
U
u_{t}\sim U
(b)
u
t
вҲј
L
u_{t}\sim L
(c)
u
t
вҲј
t
вҖӢ
(
5
)
u_{t}\sim t(5)
Figure 1
:
MAR(1,1) processes with
П•
=
0.2
\phi=0.2
and
ПҲ
=
0.8
\psi=0.8
, and with error densities: L.:Laplace, U.:Uniform, t(5): t-Student with d.f.=5, over a period of
T
=
200
T=200
6.1.2
Nonlinear Transformations
In practice, we choose a finite set of nonlinear autocovariances, depending on the dynamics of the process. For example, we consider the sample autocovariances to capture linear serial dependence in the data, or residuals. To account for nonlinear serial dependence, we use the nonlinear autocovariances, which can be selected based on graphically displayed nonlinear autocorrelograms [Gourieroux, Jasiak (2001)]. This approach provides additional insights on the choice of
H
H
. A priori, we can set
H
вүҘ
p
H\geq p
, where
p
p
is the lag length of the model. Specifically, processes with local explosive patterns and/or time-varying volatility are characterized by conditional heteroscedasticity, which can be captured by the autocovariances of squared observations. The third powers can accommodate skewed distributions, common in financial data.
Logarithms are useful for capturing nonlinearities and transforming positive price series into variables that take both positive and negative values.
For models with Cauchy distributed errors, we may employ fractional transformations, such as the square root of absolute value, since the unconditional expectation of a fractional power of a Cauchy distributed variable exists, while the unconditional expectation of an integer order does not.
Section 5 shows that combinations of power transformations weighted by exponential functions can also be used and that by increasing the set of associated autocovariance conditions, one can improve the performance of the GCov estimator and test.
6.1.3
NLSD Test for Time Series
This section examines the finite-sample size and power of the (non)linear serial dependence (NLSD) test of
y
t
y_{t}
computed from transformations
a
a
of a univariate time series
y
t
y_{t}
.
The null hypothesis:
H
0
,
a
=
{
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
0
,
вҲҖ
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
,
H_{0,a}=\{\Gamma_{0,a}(h)=0,\;\forall h=1,...,H\},
is tested against the fixed alternative hypothesis:
H
1
,
a
=
{
вҲғ
h
:
such that
вҖӢ
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вү 
0
}
.
H_{1,a}=\{\exists h:\mbox{such that }\;\Gamma_{0,a}(h)\neq 0\}.
Under this fixed alternative, the process is a MAR(0,1) model with an autoregressive coefficient denoted by
Оі
\gamma
that varies between 0.1 and 0.9. Thus, the alternative can be written in terms of the parameters as:
H
1
,
a
=
{
Оі
,
f
:
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оі
,
f
)
=
0
}
.
H_{1,a}=\{\gamma,f:\Gamma(h;\gamma,f)=0\}.
For each value of
Оі
\gamma
and each error density
f
0
f_{0}
, we simulate the strong white noise series
y
1
s
,
вҖҰ
,
y
T
s
,
s
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
S
y_{1}^{s},...,y_{T}^{s},s=1,...,S
with S=5000 replications and compute the NLSD test statistics, based on
K
=
2
K=2
transformations of time series:
y
t
,
y
t
2
y_{t},y_{t}^{2}
, and lag
H
=
1
H=1
. The results are reported in Table
1
, for the nominal size of the test of
0.05
0.05
.
The first row of Table
1
with the zero values of coefficients
Оі
\gamma
provides the rejection rates corresponding to the size. The remaining rows illustrate the size-adjusted
11
11
11
The size adjustment is based on the 95th percentile of the sample distribution of simulated test statistic.
power of the test against the fixed alternative of a MAR(0,1) process with coefficients
Оі
=
0.3
,
0.7
\gamma=0.3,0.7
.
The columns of Table
1
show the outcomes for different sample sizes and the Uniform, Laplace, and t(5) error distributions. Additional results for other values of
Оі
\gamma
are provided in Table 6 of Appendix C.1.
Table 1
:
NLSD Test of the absence of (non)linear dependence against the fixed alternative of MAR(0,1) at 5% significance level: empirical size and power
Оі
\gamma
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
0.0
0.0414
0.0484
0.0512
0.0450
0.0502
0.0518
0.0496
0.0540
0.0480
0.3
0.6014
0.5742
0.5674
0.9202
0.9266
0.9256
1
0.9998
1
0.7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
The first row (
Оі
=
0
\gamma=0
) shows the size of the test and the remaining rows show the size-adjusted power against fixed alternatives.
The results reported in Table
1
show close to the nominal empirical size and good power of the test against fixed alternatives, given each error density.
When the sample size increases, the size converges to 0.05 and the power converges to 1. We also observe that the power of the test increases in the values of the autoregressive coefficient
ПҲ
\psi
of MAR(0,1).
Furthermore, we investigate the power under the local alternatives by generating MAR(0,1) models with autoregressive coefficients equal to
Оҙ
T
\frac{\delta}{\sqrt{T}}
, where
Оҙ
\delta
varies between
0
and
0.9
0.9
. The results are provided in Figure
2
. Since we consider local alternatives, we expect asymptotically the powers to be close to the size for small
Оҙ
\delta
, while for bigger
Оҙ
\delta
, we deviate further away.
(a)
T
=
100
T=100
(b)
T
=
200
T=200
(c)
T
=
500
T=500
Figure 2
:
Local asymptotic power of the NLSD test.
We observe that the test has good local power, and the size-adjusted power functions in the neighborhood of the null hypothesis increase fast and nonlinearly in
Оҙ
\delta
. The local asymptotic properties
depend on the sample size and the error distribution. When the sample size increases from 100 to 500, we observe a greater improvement for the Uniform and t(5) distributions compared to the Laplace distribution, which has the least heavy tail among these three distributions.
6.1.4
GCov Specification Test for Semi-Parametric Models
This section examines the finite-sample size and power of the GCov specification test applied to nonlinear transforms of the residuals of a model. The true model is a MAR(0,1) with errors
u
t
=
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
u_{t}=(1-\psi L^{-1})y_{t}
. It is estimated by the GCov estimator with lag length H=3. We consider K=2 with the residuals
u
^
T
,
t
\hat{u}_{T,t}
and their squares
u
^
T
,
t
2
\hat{u}_{T,t}^{2}
as non-linear transformations, where
u
^
T
,
t
=
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
^
T
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
\hat{u}_{T,t}=(1-\hat{\psi}_{T}L^{-1})y_{t}
, for the MAR(0,1) process.
To study the size, we compute the test statistics from the autocovariance matrices of nonlinear transformations of the residuals, denoted by
О“
a
(
h
;
.
,
f
)
\Gamma_{a}(h;.,f)
. The null hypothesis of вҖқcorrect specificationвҖқ is:
H
0
,
a
=
{
ПҲ
,
f
:
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
ПҲ
,
f
)
=
0
,
вҲҖ
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
H_{0,a}=\{\psi,f:\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\psi,f)=0,\;\forall h=1,...,H\}
, and it is tested against
H
0
,
a
=
{
ПҲ
,
f
:
вҲғ
h
:
such that
вҖӢ
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
ПҲ
,
f
)
вү 
0
}
H_{0,a}=\{\psi,f:\exists h:\mbox{such that }\;\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\psi,f)\neq 0\}
.
We generate the noncausal MAR(0,1) processes with the autoregressive coefficients
ПҲ
\psi
equal to
0.3
0.3
and
0.7
0.7
, using S=5000 replications.
The results are reported in Table
2
for the nominal size of 0.05.
The top two rows of Table
2
illustrate the rejection rates corresponding to the empirical size of the GCov specification test applied to the MAR(0,1) model, and the columns display the results for the Uniform, Laplace, and t(5) error distributions and different sample sizes.
Table
2
shows that the GCov specification test is conservative at
T
=
100
T=100
in all cases.
When the sample size increases, the size approaches the nominal size for all distributions. The power increases in
ПҲ
\psi
, similar to the pattern in Table 1, and quickly converges to one.
Table 2
:
Empirical size and power of GCov specification test of MAR(0,1) at 5% significance
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
S.
0
0.3
0.0224
0.0454
0.0386
0.0348
0.0566
0.0534
0.0406
0.0544
0.0560
0
0.7
0.0200
0.0400
0.0338
0.0298
0.0528
0.0468
0.0408
0.0552
0.0528
P.
0.8
0.3
0.1016
0.1724
0.1788
0.3404
0.4468
0.4672
0.9092
0.9282
0.9300
0.8
0.7
0.9680
0.9882
0.9896
1
1
1
1
1
1
S.: size, P.: power (size-adjusted)
An interesting way to investigate the power of the GCov specification test is to consider the null hypothesis of MAR(0,1) and deviate from it by adding a causal autoregressive coefficient
Оі
=
П•
\gamma=\phi
. This transforms the MAR(0,1) model under the null hypothesis into a MAR(1,1) model under the alternative. Then, the fixed alternative hypothesis is:
H
1
,
a
=
{
ПҲ
,
Оі
,
f
:
вҲғ
h
:
such that
вҖӢ
О“
0
,
a
вҖӢ
(
h
;
ПҲ
,
Оі
,
f
)
вү 
0
}
.
H_{1,a}=\{\psi,\gamma,f:\exists h:\mbox{such that }\;\Gamma_{0,a}(h;\psi,\gamma,f)\neq 0\}.
Rows 3 and 4 of Table
2
report the size-adjusted power of the test applied to a noncausal MAR(0,1) model with coefficients
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
and
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
, when an additional causal coefficient
Оі
=
П•
=
0.8
\gamma=\phi=0.8
of MAR(1,1) is present under the fixed alternative, for each given error density and sample size reported in the columns. By comparing the results for
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
and
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
, we can conclude that the empirical power increases in
ПҲ
\psi
for all sample sizes and distributions. Additional results for other values of the causal persistence coefficient
Оі
=
П•
\gamma=\phi
are given in Table
7
, Appendix C.1.
(a)
MAR(0,1) with
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
(b)
MAR(0,1) with
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
Figure 3
:
Local asymptotic power of GCov specification test
Figure 3 illustrates the power of the GCov specification test against local alternatives, computed from the sample of size
T
=
500
T=500
and size-adjusted. The three local power functions of the MAR(0,1) model with Uniform, Laplace and t(5) distributed errors are plotted against
Оҙ
=
0
,
0.1
,
вҖҰ
,
0.9
\delta=0,0.1,\dots,0.9
, where
П•
T
=
Оі
T
=
Оҙ
T
\phi_{T}=\gamma_{T}=\frac{\delta}{\sqrt{T}}
.
Panel (a) displays the results for the MAR(0,1) model with
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
and panel (b) shows the results for
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
. We observe that the test has good local power in each case. The best local power is displayed in both panels by the Uniform distributed errors with the heaviest tails. The local power functions increase faster in panel (b)
for the model with higher noncausal persistence than in panel (a). Overall, the rate of increase of local power functions is lower compared with the local power of the (non)linear dependence NLSD test displayed in Figure 2. Hence, larger sample sizes are recommended for the specification test.
6.1.5
Infinite Variance Errors
So far, we have considered only error distributions with finite variances. The size and power properties of the GCov specification test of the MAR(0,1) model with Cauchy distributed errors are illustrated in Table
10
, Appendix C.2. We use K=3, with the square roots and logarithms of the absolute values of residuals as nonlinear transformations, and set the maximum lag equal to
H
=
3
H=3
.
We observe that the empirical size is close to the nominal for T=200, and the power quickly converges to one for both values of
ПҲ
\psi
as the number of observations increases. Compared to Table
2
, the power is higher for
T
=
100
T=100
and the convergence in
T
T
is faster.
6.2
GCov Bootstrap Test
In the first part of this section, we consider the bootstrap approximation of finite-sample size and power of the GCov specification test based on the GCov estimator. In the second part, we examine the GCov test and GCov bootstrap test, both with the AML estimator.
6.2.1
GCov Bootstrap Test with GCov Estimator
The performance of GCov bootstrap test depends on the quality of the bootstrap approximation of finite sample properties of a GCov test.
We consider a MAR(0,1) model under the null hypothesis, and a MAR(1,1) under the fixed alternative with the same error distributions and parameter values as those in Section 6.1.4. The GCov test statistic is based on
K
=
2
K=2
with residuals and their squares, and
H
=
3
H=3
. The bootstrap with
S
=
100
S=100
is replicated 1000 times.
Table
12
, Appendix C.3 shows the bootstrap approximation of finite sample size and power of GCov specification test obtained from rejection rates with a chi-square quantile used as the critical value and two sampling schemes: with and without replacement. By comparing these results with Table 2, we observe that the bootstrap provides a reliable approximation of finite-sample size, and the quality of the approximation improves with increasing
T
T
. Moreover, we find that sampling with replacement provides more accurate results. An additional insight is obtained for the MAR(0,1) process with t(5)-distributed errors and
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
. Figure
5
, Appendix C.3 shows the convergence of the distribution of the GCov bootstrap test statistic to the theoretical chi-square distribution when the sample size increases from
T
T
=100 to
T
T
=500.
6.2.2
Parametric Estimation of Causal-Noncausal Models
For diagnostic checking of parametric models, the GCov specification test can be applied to residuals
u
^
T
,
t
=
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
t
,
Оё
~
T
)
\hat{u}_{T,t}=g(\tilde{Y}_{t},\tilde{\theta}_{T})
, where
Оё
~
T
\tilde{\theta}_{T}
is not the GCov estimator.
When a causal-noncausal model is fully parametric, and the errors are assumed to follow a parametric density, the Approximate Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimator can be used.
The Approximate Maximum Likelihood (AML) estimator of univariate MAR(r,s) processes defined in equation (3.6) and introduced by Lanne and Saikkonen (2011) is:
(
ОЁ
^
,
ОҰ
^
,
ОҪ
^
)
=
A
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
x
ОЁ
,
ОҰ
,
ОҪ
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
r
+
1
T
вҲ’
s
ln
вҒЎ
f
вҖӢ
[
ОЁ
вҖӢ
(
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
ОҰ
вҖӢ
(
L
)
вҖӢ
y
t
;
ОҪ
]
,
(\hat{\Psi},\,\hat{\Phi},\,\hat{\nu})=Argmax_{\Psi,\Phi,\nu}\,\sum_{t=r+1}^{T-s}\ln\,f[\Psi(L^{-1})\Phi(L)y_{t};\nu],
where
f
[
.
;
ОҪ
]
f[.;\nu]
denotes the non-Gaussian probability density function of
u
t
u_{t}
, such as a t(
ОҪ
\nu
)-student density, for example.
Davis and Song (2020) discuss the ML estimator for the multivariate causal-noncausal VAR process given in Example 3, Section 3.1, with a parametric error density.
6.2.3
GCov Test and GCov Bootstrap Test with AML Estimator
To illustrate the performance of GCov bootstrap test with the AML estimator, we consider the simulated processes with errors from the t(4), t(5) and t(6) distributions. Like in the previous Section, the model under the null hypothesis is a MAR(0,1), and under the fixed alternative is a MAR(1,1). First, we estimate the MAR(0,1) model from the AML estimator based on a t-student log-likelihood function. Next, we plug the AML residuals into the formula of the GCov specification test statistic in eq. (3.3), i.e., we calculate the sample autocovariances from the AML residuals and squared residuals (K=2) and their lags up to H=3.
Table 3
:
A:
Empirical size and power of GCov test with plug-in AML residuals and
B:
Empirical size and power of GCov bootstrap test of MAR(0,1) with AML, at 5% significance
Panel
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
A
S.
0
0.3
0.065
0.061
0.061
0.071
0.050
0.054
0.070
0.051
0.061
0
0.7
0.064
0.064
0.061
0.072
0.048
0.050
0.072
0.056
0.062
P.
0.8
0.3
0.431
0.400
0.391
0.735
0.697
0.645
0.988
0.990
0.986
0.8
0.7
0.994
0.996
0.993
1
1
1
1
1
1
B
S.
0
0.3
0.060
0.061
0.067
0.064
0.048
0.051
0.058
0.045
0.056
0
0.7
0.061
0.064
0.063
0.066
0.050
0.049
0.053
0.044
0.055
P.
0.8
0.3
0.430
0.410
0.388
0.704
0.664
0.633
0.982
0.980
0.975
0.8
0.7
0.991
0.993
0.911
1
1
1
1
1
1
S.: size, P.: power (size-adjusted)
This approach is a one-step procedure proposed as an alternative to two separate Ljung-Box tests applied to the residuals and their squares. The experiment is replicated 1000 times.  Then, the finite sample size and power are evaluated from rejection rates based on the theoretical critical value and given in part A of Table
3
, where we observe a slight size distortion of the test in finite samples. Nevertheless, the test has reasonably good performance.
Instead of this simple procedure, one can use the GCov bootstrap test to ensure better finite sample properties. We examine the size and power of the GCov bootstrap test of MAR(0,1) against MAR(1,1) with
S
=
100
S=100
and AML-estimated residuals based on 1000 replications. The results are reported in Table
3
-B based on sampling with replacement. We find that the size of the GCov bootstrap is close to the nominal level of 0.5 for all sample sizes and error distributions. The power of the GCov bootstrap test is high and increases to 1 with sample size
12
12
12
The size adjustment is based on the bootstrapped critical value.
. Moreover, we report the size and power of the bootstrap test based on sampling without replacement in Table
13
of Appendix C.3, providing additional evidence based on test size that sampling with replacement proposed in Section 4 is preferred.
6.2.4
Infinite Variance Errors
Table
11
, Appendix C.2 presents additional results on the GCov bootstrap test of MAR(0,1) with Cauchy error distribution and OLS estimator. The size of our test compares favorably with the size of the bootstrap test of coefficient
ПҲ
\psi
in MAR(0,1) based on the (unconstrained) OLS estimator and sampling without replacement introduced in Cavaliere et al. (2020), who consider the test of the null hypothesis
ПҒ
=
ПҲ
=
0.5
\rho=\psi=0.5
by unrestricted bootstrap for Stable error distribution with parameters
Оұ
=
1.0
\alpha=1.0
and
ОІ
=
0.0
\beta=0.0
based on the test statistic
r
T
r_{T}
. The size of our GCov bootstrap test is between 5.3 and 5.5, depending on
ПҲ
\psi
, which is close to 5.4 reported in Table 2, Cavaliere et al. (2020). The results from sampling with and without replacement are both provided in Table
11
. We observe that, as in Table 3, sampling with replacement provides a size closer to the nominal.
6.3
GCov Specification Test with Many Transformations
We examine the finite sample performance of the GCov specification test with many transformations applied to the MAR(0,1) processes with t(5) distributed errors, coefficients
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
and
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
generated in samples of size:
T
=
100
,
200
,
500
T=100,200,500
. The models are estimated by GCov with
K
=
7
,
8
,
9
K=7,8,9
transformations, which are the absolute values of consecutive powers of the residuals weighted by exponential functions with
t
=
0.01
t=0.01
, and the maximum lags are
H
=
3
,
4
,
5
H=3,4,5
. Thus, the number of nonlinear autocovariance conditions used in this study ranges from 48 to 80. The size of the GCov specification test based on rejection rates from 1000 replications is reported in Table
4
. We observe that the size approaches the nominal value as
K
K
,
H
H
and
T
T
increase. For both values of
ПҲ
\psi
and all values of
H
H
we observe that the size is closer to the nominal for
K
=
9
K=9
, in comparison to
K
=
7
,
8
K=7,8
.
For
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
the nominal size is reached for
K
=
7
K=7
and
T
=
500
T=500
, for all
H
H
considered. For
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
more transformations
K
=
9
K=9
and
T
=
500
T=500
are needed, for all
H
H
considered.
Table 4
:
Empirical size of GCov test with many transformations at 5% level,
T
=
500
T=500
.
S./P.
H
H
K
=
7
K=7
K
=
8
K=8
K
=
9
K=9
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
S.
H
=
3
H=3
0.033
0.051
0.035
0.051
0.054
0.050
H
=
4
H=4
0.031
0.049
0.034
0.059
0.050
0.056
H
=
5
H=5
0.031
0.053
0.029
0.052
0.053
0.060
The power functions are illustrated in Appendix C 4. We find that the power of test converges quickly to 1 in sample size
T
T
, and the convergence is faster for higher values of
ПҲ
\psi
.
7
Empirical Application
In this section, we apply the GCov specification test to a univariate causal-noncausal model fitted to the series of aluminum prices in U.S. Dollars per metric ton. This approach is motivated by the presence of spikes and bubbles in aluminum prices, and the recent literature on causal-noncausal modeling of commodity prices [Hecq, Lieb, and Telg (2016), Fries and Zakoian (2019), Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023)]. First, we apply the (non)linear serial dependence NLSD test to the data, and next use the GCov specification test to examine the goodness of fit of the estimated causal-noncausal processes.
Our sample consists of
T
=
228
T=228
monthly average prices recorded between January 2005 and October 2024 and known as the Global price of Aluminum
13
13
13
International Monetary Fund, Global price of Aluminum [PALUMUSDM], retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/PALUMUSDM, December 20, 2024.
. We detrend the series of prices by regressing it on time (polynomial of degree one). The detrended prices are plotted in Figure
4(a)
, where we observe multiple spikes and a sudden drop in aluminum prices during the 2008 recession when the commodity prices fell due to weak demand. In addition, in 2020, we see a spike in the price of aluminum, which is due to the weak supply of commodities at the beginning of the Covid period.
To ensure the identification of causal and noncausal dynamics, we test the data for normality by applying the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test. The test statistic of 0.50 exceeds the critical value of 0.08. Hence, the null hypothesis of the normality of the aluminum price distribution is rejected. Figure
8
(a) in Appendix C.4 provides the sample density plot of demeaned aluminum price and compares it to the Gaussian density to confirm that the aluminum prices are non-Gaussian.
We test for nonlinear serial dependence in the aluminum prices using the NLSD test introduced in Section 2. We compute the test statistic from the series using H=9 and K=2. The value of the NLDS test is 1675.4 and exceeds the critical value of 50.99, showing (non)linear serial dependence in the data. This finding is confirmed by the ACF of the series and their squares in Figures
9(a)
and
9(b)
in Appendix C.4.
Next, we use the semi-parametric GCov estimator and
explore several specifications of the causal-noncausal MAR(r,s) models for varying autoregressive orders
r
r
and
s
s
without any distributional assumptions on the errors. In Table
5
we report the GCov estimated parameters with H=9 and K=2, where we use the residuals and the logarithm of the second power of the residuals to capture the linear and nonlinear serial dependencies, respectively. By considering nonlinear autocovariances at higher lags, we accommodate possible long-range serial dependence, with the total of 18 transformations. Under the strict stationarity assumption, all models have autoregressive polynomials with roots outside the unit circle. The estimated roots of the polynomials
ОҰ
^
вҖӢ
(
L
)
\hat{\Phi}(L)
and
ОЁ
^
вҖӢ
(
L
вҲ’
1
)
\hat{\Psi}(L^{-1})
are given in the last column of Table 4.
We apply the GCov specification test to each model to assess the fit. The test statistics and the associated critical values are given in column 3 of Table
5
. We find that the GCov specification test does not reject the null hypothesis of correct specification of the MAR(1,1) model, indicating the absence of (non)linear serial dependence in the residuals. The in-sample fitted values of the MAR(1,1) model are shown in
Figure
4(b)
. Figure
8
(b) in Appendix C.5 illustrates the non-Gaussian distribution of the residuals. The ACFs of the residuals and their squares given in Figures
9(c)
and
9(d)
of Appendix C.4 are not statistically significant, which confirms the results of the GCov specification test. Furthermore, we plot the fitted causal and noncausal components of MAR(1,1), defined in equation (6.2),
v
^
1
,
t
=
(
1
вҲ’
ПҲ
^
вҖӢ
L
вҲ’
1
)
вҖӢ
y
t
\hat{v}_{1,t}=(1-\hat{\psi}L^{-1})y_{t}
and
v
^
2
,
t
=
(
1
вҲ’
П•
^
вҖӢ
L
)
вҖӢ
y
t
\hat{v}_{2,t}=(1-\hat{\phi}L)y_{t}
in Figure
10
of Appendix C.5.
Table 5
:
GCov estimated parameters, GCov specification test with
ПҮ
2
\chi^{2}
critical values at
5
%
5\%
significance level, and roots of
ОҰ
^
вҖӢ
(
L
вҲ’
1
)
\hat{\Phi}(L^{-1})
and
ОЁ
^
вҖӢ
(
L
)
\hat{\Psi}(L)
П•
1
\phi_{1}
ПҲ
1
\psi_{1}
ПҲ
2
\psi_{2}
test statistic
ПҮ
0.95
2
\chi^{2}_{0.95}
L
1
П•
L_{1}^{\phi}
L
1
ПҲ
L_{1}^{\psi}
L
2
ПҲ
L_{2}^{\psi}
MAR(0,1)
0.93
вҲ—
0.93^{*}
57.53
49.80
1.07
MAR(1,1)
0.41
вҲ—
0.87
вҲ—
22.32
48.60
2.43
1.14
MAR(1,2)
0.62
вҲ—
0.62^{*}
0.76
вҲ—
0.76^{*}
0.02
22.60
47.4
1.60
1.27
-36.93
* indicates statistical significance at 5%
In addition, we estimate the MAR(1,1) model using the AML estimator with a log-likelihood function based on the fitted t-student error distribution with 3.9 degrees of freedom
14
14
14
The degrees of freedom are an additional AML parameter estimated in this model.
and apply the GCov bootstrap test. Since AML suffers from a bi-modality issue [Hecq, Lieb, and Telg (2016) and Bec, Nielsen, and SaГҜdi (2020)], we employ a grid search of initial values as suggested in Bec, Nielsen, and SaГҜdi (2020)
for parameters
П•
\phi
and
ПҲ
\psi
with a grid size of
0.01
0.01
between 0 and 1. The AML estimates are
П•
^
=
0.42
\hat{\phi}=0.42
and
ПҲ
^
=
0.90
\hat{\psi}=0.90
. The GCov bootstrap test does not reject the null hypothesis of i.i.d. errors, based on comparing the value of the test statistic
42.30
42.30
with the critical value of
57.78
57.78
.
The parameters of MAR(1,1) estimated by the GCov and AML estimators are very close. In both cases, we do not reject the null of correct specification, based on the GCov specification test (Table
5
) and the GCov bootstrap test, respectively. By comparing the approaches used to estimate the parameters, we can argue that the GCov method provides an estimator and a test with a known asymptotic distribution in one step, while the AML estimator needs great attention to the initial values of optimization and grid search. Moreover, the GCov bootstrap test replaces two separate Liung-Box tests with one testing procedure of a joint hypothesis.
(a)
Detrended aluminum price
(b)
MAR(1,1) fitted values
Figure 4
:
Detrended aluminum price, MAR(1,1) fitted values
8
Conclusion
This paper examined nonlinear serial dependence testing in non-Gaussian time series and specification testing in semi-parametric models with non-Gaussian i.i.d. errors. We introduced a new test of the null hypothesis of the absence of (non)linear dependence in time series, called the NLSD test. We studied analytically the asymptotic properties of the GCov specification test under the local alternative hypotheses to provide convincing empirical evidence of its potential as a widely applicable diagnostic tool for testing the goodness of fit.
We showed that under the local alternatives, the GCov specification test statistic converges to a non-central chi-square distribution with a non-centrality parameter depending on the direction of the alternative.
We also
compared the GCov specification test with a concentrated and extended CUGMM-based overidentification test.
For finite sample size adjustment of GCov specification tests in dynamic non-Gaussian models estimated by GCov or maximum likelihood, we introduced the GCov bootstrap test and provided regularity conditions ensuring its validity.
We also explored how the asymptotic performance of the GCov specification test can be improved by increasing the set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions. We showed that the nonlinear transformations that help identify the unknown error distribution are power functions weighted by decreasing exponential functions of errors. The GCov estimator based on that enlarged set of nonlinear transformations is asymptotically more efficient, which increases the set of alternatives against which the GCov test has asymptotic power of 1. In addition, by appropriately choosing the nonlinear transformations and orthonormalizing them in the Hilbert space, we obtained an optimally weighted test statistic with an asymptotic normal distribution.
We examined through simulations the finite sample properties of the
GCov specification, bootstrap and NLSD tests under the fixed and local alternative hypotheses. Our study shows that these tests perform well in detecting nonlinear serial dependence in mixed causal-noncausal processes
and residuals of nonlinear models.
For illustration, we applied the NLSD test to the aluminum price and used the GCov specification and bootstrap tests to select the optimal fit of a causal-noncausal MAR model.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank A. Djogbenou, C. Gourieroux, V. Zinde-Walsh, and the participants of the Canadian Economic Association (CEA) 2023 meetings, 2023 European Winter Meeting of the Econometric Society,  Canadian Econometrics Study Group (CESG) 2024 meeting, CFE-CMStatistics 2024 Conference, Statistics Society of Canada 2025 Annual Meeting, 2025 Annual Conference of the International Association for Applied Econometrics (IAAE), and the workshop in honor of James Mackinnon at QueenвҖҷs University for their helpful comments. Moreover, we thank the Associate Editor and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments and suggestions.
Funding
This work was financially supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
REFERENCES
Anderson, T. (1999): вҖқAsymptotic Theory for Canonical Correlation AnalysisвҖқ, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 70, 1-29.
Anderson, T. (2002): вҖқCanonical Correlation Analysis and Reduced Rank Regression in Autoregressive ModelsвҖқ, Annals of Statistics, 30, 1134-1154.
Andrews, D. (1988): вҖқLaws of Large Numbers for Dependent Non-Identically Distributed Random VariablesвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 4, 458-467.
Bec, F., Nielsen, H. B., and S.SaГҜdi (2020): вҖқMixed Causal-Noncausal Autoregressions: Bimodality Issues in Estimation and Unit Root TestingвҖқ, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 82(6), 1413-1428.
Bickel, P. (1982): вҖқOn Adaptive EstimationвҖқ, Annals of Statistics, 10, 647-671.
Bierens, H. (1990): вҖқA Consistent Conditional Moment Test of Functional FormвҖқ, Econometrica, Vol 58, 1443-1458.
Box, G. and D. Pierce (1970): вҖқDistribution of Residual Autocorrelations in Autoregressive-Integrated Moving Average Time Series ModelsвҖқ, JASA, 65, 1509-1526.
Bryan, K. (2006) вҖқElementary Inversion of the Laplace TransformвҖқ, Research Paper, Department of Mathematics, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology.
Cavaliere, G., Nielsen, H, and A. Rahbek (2020): вҖқBootstrapping Noncausal Autoregressions with Applications to Explosive Bubble ModellingвҖқ, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 38, 55-67.
Chan, K., Ho, L., and H. Tong (2006): вҖқA Note on Time-Reversibility of Multivariate Linear
ProcessesвҖқ, Biometrika 93, 221-227.
Chen, J., Gao, Z., and R. Tsay (2025): вҖқForward Variable Selection in Ultra-High Dimensional Linear Regression Using Gram-Schmidt OrthogonalizationвҖқ, working paper, University of Chicago.
Chu, B. (2023): вҖқA Distance-Based Test of Independence Between Two Multivariate Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 195, 105-151.
Chitturi, R. (1976): вҖқDistribution of Multivariate White Noise AutocorrelationsвҖқ, JASA, 71, 223-226.
Davidson, R., and J. MacKinnon (2006): вҖқThe Power of Bootstrap and Asymptotic TestвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 133, 421-441.
Davis, R., Matsui, M., Thomas Mikosch, T. and P. Wan (2018): вҖқApplications of Distance Correlation to Time SeriesвҖқ, Bernoulli 24(4A), 3087-3116.
Davis, R. and L. Song (2020): вҖқNoncausal Vector AR Processes with Application to Economic Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 216, 246-267.
De Gooijer, J.G. (2023): вҖқOn Portmanteau-Type Tests for Nonlinear Multivariate Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 195, 105-157.
Dovonon, P., and S. Goncalves (2017): вҖқBootstrapping the GMM Overidentification Test Under First-Order Underidentification,вҖқ Journal of Econometrics, 201, 43-71.
Dovonon, P., Hall, A., and F. Kleibergen (2020): вҖқInference in Second-Order Identified ModelsвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 218, 346-372
Escanciano, M. (2007): вҖқModel Checks Using Residual Marked Empirical ProcessesвҖқ, Statistica Sinica, 17, 115-138
Feller, W. (1971): вҖқProbability Theory and Its ApplicationsвҖқ, Vol 3, 2nd Ed, Wiley, Chapter 13: вҖқLaplace Transforms, Tauberian Theorems, ResolventsвҖқ.
Fokianos, K. and M. Pitsillou (2018): вҖқTesting Independence for Multivariate Time Series via the Autodistance Correlation MatrixвҖқ, Biometrika, 105, 337-352.
Fries, S., and J. M. Zakoian (2019):вҖқ Mixed Causal-Noncausal AR Processes and the Modelling of Explosive BubblesвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 35(6), 1234-1270.
Giancaterini F, Hecq, A., Jasiak, J. and A. Manafi Neyazi (2024): вҖқRegularized Generalized Covariance (RGCov) EstimatorвҖқ, ArXiv 6390395.
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2001): вҖқNonlinear Autocorrelograms; an Application to Inter-Trade DurationsвҖқ, Journal of Time Series Analysis, Vol. 23, No 2, 1-28
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2016): вҖқFiltering, Prediction and Simulation Methods for Noncausal ProcessesвҖқ, Journal of Time Series Analysis, Vol 37, 405-430
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2017): вҖқNoncausal Vector Autoregressive Process: Representation, Identification and Semi-Parametric EstimationвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 200, 118-134.
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2023): вҖқGeneralized Covariance EstimatorвҖқ, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 41, 1315-1327.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and J.P. Renne (2017): вҖқStatistical Inference for Independent
Component Analysis: Application to Structural VAR ModelsвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics 196, 111-126.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and J.P. Renne (2018): вҖқIdentification and Estimation in Non-
Fundamental Structural ModelsвҖқ, Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (4), pp.1915-1953.
Gourieroux, C. and J.M. Zakoian (2017): вҖқLocal Explosion Modelling by Non-causal ProcessвҖқ, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 79, 737-756.
Guay, A. (2021): вҖқIdentification of Structural Vector Autoregressions through Higher Unconditional MomentsвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 225, 27-46.
Hecq, A., Lieb, L., and S. Telg (2016): вҖқIdentification of Mixed Causal-Noncausal Models in Finite SamplesвҖқ, Annals of Economics and Statistics, (123/124), 307-331.
Hecq, A. and E. Voisin (2021): вҖқForecasting Bubbles with Mixed Causal-Noncausal Autoregressive ModelsвҖқ, Econometrics and Statistics, 20, 29-45.
Hotelling, H. (1936): вҖқRelation Between Two Sets of VariantsвҖқ, Biometrika, 28, 321-377.
Keweloh, S. (2020): вҖқA Generalized Method of Moments Estimator for Structural Autoregressions Based on Higher MomentsвҖқ, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 39(3), 1-29.
Koenker, R. and J.A.F. Machado (1999) вҖқGMM Inference when the Number of Moment Conditions is LargeвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 93, 327-344
Lanne, M., and J. Luoto (2019), вҖқGMM Estimation of Non-Gaussian Structural Vector AutoregressionвҖқ, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 69-81
Lanne, M., M. Meitz, and P. Saikkonen (2017), вҖқIdentification and Estimation of Non-Gaussian
Structural Vector AutoregressionsвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics 196, pp.288-304.
Lanne, M., and P. Saikkonen, (2011): вҖқNoncausal Autoregressions for Economic Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Time Series Econometrics, 3(3).
Lanne, M., and P. Saikkonen, (2013): вҖқNoncausal Vector AutoregressionвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 29(3), 447-481.
Ling, S. (2007): вҖқA Double AR(p) Model: Structure and EstimationвҖқ, Statistica Sinica, 17,161-175.
Newey, W. (1991): вҖқUniform Convergence in Probability and Stochastic EquicontinuityвҖқ, Econometrica, 59, 1161-1167.
Newey, W. (1988): вҖқAdaptive Estimation of Regression Models Via Moment RestrictionsвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 38, 301-334.
Post, E. (1930): вҖқGeneralized DifferentiationвҖқ, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 32, 723-781.
Robinson, P. (1973): вҖқ Generalized Canonical Analysis for Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 3, 141-160.
Swensen, A. (2022): вҖқOn Causal and Non-Causal Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Time Series Analysis, 43(2), 178-196.
Velasco, C. and I. Lobato (2018): вҖқFrequency Domain Minimum Distance Inference for Possibly Noninvertible and Noncausal ARMA ModelsвҖқ, Annals of Statistics, 46, 555-579.
Wan, P., and R. Davis (2022): вҖқGoodness-of-Fit Testing for Time Series Models via Distance CovarianceвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 227(1), 4-24.
Wooldridge, J. and H. White (1988): вҖқSome Invariance Principles and Central Limit Theorems for Dependent Heterogeneous ProcessesвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 4, 210- 230.
GCov-Based Portmanteau Test
Online Appendices
Joann Jasiak
15
15
15
York University,
e-mail:
jasiakj@yorku.ca
,
and Aryan Manafi Neyazi
16
16
16
York University, e-mail:
aryanm@yorku.ca
.
November 3, 2025
Abstract
This supplementary material to вҖқGCov-Based Portmanteau TestвҖқ contains the appendices and is organized as follows. Appendices A and B present the theoretical results and regularity conditions.
Appendix C provides additional results based on simulations and an empirical application of the GCov specification test to the causal-noncausal model of aluminum prices.
Appendix A
The following notation is used:
m
m
- dimension of
Y
t
Y_{t}
u
t
u_{t}
is of dimension
J
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
g
)
J=dim(g)
K - dimension of transformations
a
a
a
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
=
g
a
a(u_{t})=g_{a}
is of dimension
K
K
О“
\Gamma
or
(
О“
a
(\Gamma^{a}
) is of dimension
K
Г—
K
K\times K
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
dim(\theta)
- dimension of
Оё
\theta
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оі
)
=
1
dim(\gamma)=1
,
Оі
\gamma
is a scalar
I
вҖӢ
d
Id
is the Identity matrix
Asymptotic Behavior of the Portmanteau Statistic Under the Independence Hypothesis
This Appendix reviews the results that already exist in the literature and are used in the proofs of new results in Appendix B.
A.1 Asymptotic Behavior of Sample Autoregressive Coefficients
Suppose that process (
Y
t
Y_{t}
) is strictly stationary and follows a VAR(1) model:
Y
t
=
Оұ
+
B
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
1
+
u
t
,
Y_{t}=\alpha+BY_{t-1}+u_{t},
(A.1)
where
u
t
u_{t}
is a square integrable strong white noise,
E
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
=
0
E(u_{t})=0
,
V
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
=
ОЈ
V(u_{t})=\Sigma
, where
ОЈ
\Sigma
is invertible and the coefficient matrix
B
B
has no eigenvalues of modulus 1. This VAR model is a SUR model with identical regressors
X
t
=
Y
t
вҲ’
1
X_{t}=Y_{t-1}
in all equations. In this case, the OLS estimators applied equation by equation are equal to the GLS estimator
of
B
B
17
17
17
In this Appendix, the index T of the estimators is omitted to simplify the notation.
. The estimator
B
^
вҖІ
=
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
\hat{B}^{\prime}=\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}
is asymptotically
normally distributed:
T
вҖӢ
[
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
B
^
вҖІ
)
вҲ’
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
B
вҖІ
]
вүҲ
N
вҖӢ
[
0
,
ОЈ
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
.
\sqrt{T}[vec(\hat{B}^{\prime})-vecB^{\prime}]\approx N[0,\Sigma\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1}].
Under the null hypothesis:
H
0
=
(
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
=
0
)
=
(
B
=
0
)
H_{0}=(\Gamma(1)=0)=(B=0)
, we have
ОЈ
=
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
\Sigma=\Gamma(0)
and
T
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
B
вҖІ
)
вҲј
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҠ—
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
)
.
\sqrt{T}vec(B^{\prime})\sim N(0,\Gamma(0)\otimes[\Gamma(0)^{-1}]).
where the
вҠ—
\otimes
denotes the Kronecker product [see Chitturi (1974), eq. (1.13)].
A.2 Portmanteau Statistic as a Lagrange Multiplier test
It can be shown that the Lagrange Multiplier test statistic
for testing
H
0
=
(
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
=
0
)
=
(
B
=
0
)
H_{0}=(\Gamma(1)=0)=(B=0)
is:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
1
)
=
T
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
=
T
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
R
^
2
вҖӢ
(
1
)
.
\hat{\xi}_{T}(1)=T\;Tr[\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}\hat{\Gamma}(1)\hat{\Gamma}(0)^{-1}]=T\;Tr\hat{R}^{2}(1).
(A.2)
[See, e.g., Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023), Supplementary Material].
A.3 Asymptotic Behavior of Sample Autocovariance
The asymptotic distribution of
T
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
вҲ’
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
]
\sqrt{T}vec[\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}-\Gamma(1)^{\prime}]
for model (A.1) is given in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023), Supplementary Material [see also Chitturi (1976), Hannan (1976)]. We have:
T
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
вҲ’
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
]
=
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
[
B
^
вҖІ
вҲ’
B
вҖІ
]
=
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
[
B
^
вҖІ
вҲ’
B
вҖІ
]
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\sqrt{T}[\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}-\Gamma(1)^{\prime}]=\hat{\Gamma}(0)\sqrt{T}[\hat{B}^{\prime}-B^{\prime}]=\Gamma(0)\sqrt{T}[\hat{B}^{\prime}-B^{\prime}]+o_{p}(1),
and
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
вҲ’
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
]
]
=
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҖӢ
T
вҖӢ
[
B
^
вҖІ
вҲ’
B
вҖІ
]
]
=
[
I
вҖӢ
d
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
]
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
T
вҖӢ
[
B
^
вҖІ
вҲ’
B
вҖІ
]
)
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
.
vec[\sqrt{T}[\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}-\Gamma(1)^{\prime}]]=vec[\Gamma(0)\sqrt{T}[\hat{B}^{\prime}-B^{\prime}]]=[Id\otimes\Gamma(0)]vec(\sqrt{T}[\hat{B}^{\prime}-B^{\prime}])+o_{p}(1).
Under the null hypothesis
H
0
:=
(
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
=
0
)
=
(
B
=
0
)
H_{0}:=(\Gamma(1)=0)=(B=0)
of independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) process
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
with finite fourth order moment:
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
вҲ’
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
)
вҖІ
]
]
\displaystyle vec[\sqrt{T}[\hat{\Gamma}(1)^{\prime}-\Gamma(1)^{\prime}]]
вҲј
\displaystyle\sim
N
вҖӢ
[
0
,
[
I
вҖӢ
d
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
]
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
[
I
вҖӢ
d
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
]
]
\displaystyle N[0,[Id\otimes\Gamma(0)][\Gamma(0)\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1}][Id\otimes\Gamma(0)]]
=
\displaystyle=
N
вҖӢ
[
0
,
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
]
.
\displaystyle N[0,\Gamma(0)\otimes\Gamma(0)].
It follows that under this null hypothesis, the statistic
(
A.2
)
has asymptotically a chi-square distribution
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
)
\chi^{2}(K^{2})
, where
K
=
m
K=m
is the dimension of
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
.
A.4 Statistic Based on Several Autocovariances
The interpretation as a SUR regression can be extended to any lag H. Then, under the stationarity assumption, the VAR model becomes:
Y
t
=
Оұ
+
B
1
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
1
+
вӢҜ
+
B
H
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
H
+
u
t
,
Y_{t}=\alpha+B_{1}Y_{t-1}+\cdots+B_{H}Y_{t-H}+u_{t},
(A.3)
where
(
u
t
)
(u_{t})
is a square integrable strong white noise and the companion matrix of autoregressive coefficients has no eigenvalues of modulus 1. Under the null hypothesis of the independence of
Y
t
Y_{t}
, or equivalently under
H
0
=
{
B
1
=
вӢҜ
=
B
H
=
0
}
H_{0}=\{B_{1}=\cdots=B_{H}=0\}
, the explanatory variables are orthogonal, and the OLS estimators of
B
1
,
вҖҰ
,
B
H
B_{1},...,B_{H}
are such that
B
^
h
\hat{B}_{h}
coincides with the OLS estimator in the simple SUR model
Y
t
=
Оұ
h
+
B
h
вҖӢ
Y
t
вҲ’
h
+
v
t
Y_{t}=\alpha_{h}+B_{h}Y_{t-h}+v_{t}
. It follows that, under this null hypothesis, the estimators
T
вҖӢ
B
^
h
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
\sqrt{T}\hat{B}_{h},\;h=1,...,H
are independent, normally distributed with the same distribution
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
)
N(0,\Gamma(0)\otimes\Gamma(0))
.
Then, the test statistics:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
вүҲ
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
]
вҖІ
вҖӢ
[
О“
^
0
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
^
0
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
]
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)\approx T\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}(h)^{\prime}]^{\prime}[\hat{\Gamma}_{0}(0)^{-1}\otimes\hat{\Gamma}_{0}(0)^{-1}]vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}(h)^{\prime}]
(A.4)
follows asymptotically the chi-square distribution
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
)
\chi^{2}(K^{2}H)
, where
K
=
m
K=m
is the dimension of
(
Y
t
)
(Y_{t})
.
Appendix B
Asymptotic Distribution in the Semi-Parametric Framework
This Appendix provides the regularity conditions and proofs of Propositions 1, 2, B1, and B2.
B.1 The Law of Large Numbers (LLN) for Triangular Arrays
As pointed out in Section 3.3.2, the proof of the consistency of estimated autocovariances and of the GCov estimator under the local alternatives is similar to the proof under the null hypothesis of independence. The difference is in the use of the LLN for empirical autocovariances of a triangular array of observations, uniform in
Оё
\theta
.
Below, we provide a sufficient set of regularity conditions.
Regularity Conditions for LLN uniform in
Оё
\theta
.
1. Conditions on the true nonlinear dynamics
i) The observations satisfy the model:
g
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
)
=
u
t
,
g^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{T},\gamma_{T})=u_{t},
(B.1)
where the
u
t
u_{t}
вҖҷs are i.i.d. with pdf
f
0
f_{0}
.
ii) The function
g
вҲ—
g^{*}
is invertible with respect to
Y
T
,
t
Y_{T,t}
; then we can write:
Y
T
,
t
=
h
вҖӢ
(
u
t
,
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
p
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
)
.
\displaystyle Y_{T,t}=h(u_{t},Y_{T,t-1},...,Y_{T,t-p};\theta_{T},\gamma_{T}).
(B.2)
iii) For each given
T
T
, (
Y
T
,
t
)
Y_{T,t})
with
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
t=1,...,T
, is a strictly stationary and ergodic solution of the autoregressive equation (B.2).
2. Conditions on the parameters
Suppose that the parameter space is
Оҳ
Г—
C
\Theta\times C
, where
Оё
вҲҲ
Оҳ
вҠӮ
рқҗ‘
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
\theta\in\Theta\subset\mathbf{R}^{dim(\theta)}
and
Оі
вҲҲ
C
вҠӮ
рқҗ‘
\gamma\in C\subset\mathbf{R}
. We assume that:
i)
Оҳ
\Theta
and
C
C
are compact sets with non-empty interiors.
ii)
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
is in the interior of
Оҳ
\Theta
and 0 is in the interior of
C
C
.
iii)
Оё
T
=
Оё
0
+
Ој
/
T
,
Оі
T
=
ОҪ
/
T
\theta_{T}=\theta_{0}+\mu/\sqrt{T},\;\gamma_{T}=\nu/\sqrt{T}
.
iv) The combined parameter vector
Оё
,
Оі
\theta,\gamma
is identifiable in a neighborhood of
Оё
0
,
0
\theta_{0},0
.
In particular, for
T
T
sufficiently large,
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
\theta_{T},\gamma_{T}
are in the interior of
Оҳ
\Theta
and
C
C
, respectively.
3. Regularity conditions on the function
g
вҲ—
g^{*}
i) The functions
g
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
g_{k}^{*}(y;\theta,\gamma),\;k=1,...,K
are continuously differentiable on the interior
Оҳ
Г—
C
\Theta\times C
.
ii) Let us define:
G
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
~
)
=
M
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
x
(
Оё
,
Оі
)
вҲҲ
Оҳ
Г—
C
вҖӢ
[
g
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
~
,
Оё
,
Оі
)
]
2
G_{k}^{*}(\tilde{y})=Max_{(\theta,\gamma)\in\Theta\times C}[g_{k}^{*}(\tilde{y},\theta,\gamma)]^{2}
.
We assume
E
0
вҖӢ
G
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
)
<
вҲһ
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
E_{0}G_{k}^{*}(\tilde{Y})<\infty,\;k=1,...,K
where
E
0
E_{0}
denotes the expectation computed for the process
(
Y
~
t
)
(\tilde{Y}_{t})
associated with the вҖқasymptoticвҖқ parameter values
(
Оё
0
,
0
)
(\theta_{0},0)
.
iii) Let us denote by
в„¬
вҖӢ
(
y
~
)
\mathcal{B}(\tilde{y})
a uniform Lipschitz coefficient for functions
g
j
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
~
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
J
g_{j}^{*}(\tilde{y};\theta,\gamma),\;j=1,...,J
,
g
j
вҲ—
2
вҖӢ
(
y
~
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
J
g_{j}^{*2}(\tilde{y};\theta,\gamma),\;j=1,...,J
and for
g
j
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
~
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
,
g
j
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
y
~
вҲ’
h
;
Оё
,
Оі
)
,
j
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
J
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
g_{j}^{*}(\tilde{y};\theta,\gamma),\,g_{j}^{*}(\tilde{y}_{-h};\theta,\gamma),\;j,k=1,...,J,h=1,...,H
. In this expression
y
~
\tilde{y}
denotes the trajectory of the process and
y
~
вҲ’
h
\tilde{y}_{-h}
denotes this trajectory lagged by
h
h
. It is assumed that
s
u
p
T
1
T
E
|
в„¬
(
Y
T
,
t
)
]
<
вҲһ
sup_{T}\frac{1}{T}E|\mathcal{B}(Y_{T,t})]<\infty
[Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023)], where the expectation is taken with respect to the distribution of process
Y
T
.
=
(
Y
T
вҖӢ
t
)
,
Y_{T.}=(Y_{Tt}),
with
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
t=1,...,T
.
4. Condition of Near Epoch Dependence [De Jong (1998)]
The functions of the triangular array of random variables
Y
T
,
t
,
t
вүӨ
T
,
T
вүҘ
1
Y_{T,t},t\leq T,T\geq 1
are
L
2
вҲ’
N
вҖӢ
E
вҖӢ
D
L_{2}-NED
(near epoch dependent), i.e., for
ОҪ
вҖӢ
(
r
)
вүҘ
0
\nu(r)\geq 0
and
c
T
вҖӢ
t
вүҘ
0
c_{Tt}\geq 0
and for all
r
вүҘ
0
r\geq 0
and
t
вүҘ
1
t\geq 1
sup
Оё
вҲҲ
Оҳ
E
вҖӢ
[
g
j
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
вҲ’
E
вҖӢ
(
g
j
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
|
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
r
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
,
t
+
r
)
]
2
вүӨ
c
T
,
t
вҖӢ
ПҶ
вҖӢ
(
r
)
\sup_{\theta\in\Theta}E[g_{j}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)-E(g_{j}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)|Y_{T,t-r},...,Y_{T,t+r})]^{2}\leq c_{T,t}\varphi(r)
sup
Оё
вҲҲ
Оҳ
E
вҖӢ
[
g
j
2
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
вҲ’
E
вҖӢ
(
g
j
2
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
|
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
r
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
,
t
+
r
)
]
2
вүӨ
c
T
,
t
вҖӢ
ПҶ
вҖӢ
(
r
)
\sup_{\theta\in\Theta}E[g_{j}^{2}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)-E(g_{j}^{2}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)|Y_{T,t-r},...,Y_{T,t+r})]^{2}\leq c_{T,t}\varphi(r)
sup
Оё
вҲҲ
Оҳ
E
вҖӢ
[
g
j
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
вҖӢ
g
k
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
вҲ’
h
,
Оё
)
вҲ’
E
вҖӢ
(
g
j
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
,
Оё
)
|
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
r
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
,
t
+
r
)
вҖӢ
E
вҖӢ
(
g
k
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
вҲ’
h
,
Оё
)
|
Y
T
,
t
вҲ’
r
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
,
t
+
r
)
]
2
\sup_{\theta\in\Theta}E[g_{j}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)g_{k}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t-h},\theta)-E(g_{j}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t},\theta)|Y_{T,t-r},...,Y_{T,t+r})E(g_{k}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t-h},\theta)|Y_{T,t-r},...,Y_{T,t+r})]^{2}
вүӨ
c
T
,
t
вҖӢ
ПҶ
вҖӢ
(
r
)
\leq c_{T,t}\varphi(r)
for all
j
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
j,k=1,...,K
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
h=1,...,H
,
ПҶ
вҖӢ
(
r
)
вҶ’
0
\varphi(r)\rightarrow 0
as
r
вҶ’
вҲһ
r\rightarrow\infty
and
lim
sup
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
c
T
,
t
<
вҲһ
\lim\sup_{T\rightarrow\infty}\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}c_{T,t}<\infty
.
From Assumption 4, it follows that the functions
g
вҖӢ
(
Y
T
вҖӢ
t
)
g(Y_{Tt})
are uniformly integrable mixingales [De Jong (1998)].
Because the NED condition implies a mixingale condition, the weak LLN of Theorem 2, Andrews (1988) can be applied. Then, Theorem 4 of Andrews (1992) implies the uniform weak LLN (U-WLLN).
To summarize, we get the following Proposition:
Proposition B1:
Under the regularity conditions 1 to 4, we have:
p
вҖӢ
l
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
=
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
plim_{T\rightarrow\infty}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta)=\Gamma_{0}(h;\theta)
uniformly in
Оё
вҲҲ
Оҳ
\theta\in\Theta
for
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
h=1,...,H
, where
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
)
\Gamma_{0}(h;\theta)
is evaluated at
Оё
0
,
Оі
0
\theta_{0},\gamma_{0}
and
f
0
f_{0}
is the
true pdf of the error.
When the functions
g
g
are distinguished from their transforms
g
a
g_{a}
, then conditions 1 and 2 concern
g
g
and conditions 3 and 4 concern
g
a
g_{a}
.
B.2 Central Limit Theorem (CLT) for Triangular Array
We need to introduce additional regularity conditions to justify the expansion (3.13) and the asymptotic normality of the sample autocovariances
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})
computed under a sequence of local alternatives. To obtain the corresponding CLT, we use the conditional Lindeberg-Feller conditions for martingale difference triangular array [Dvoretski (1970), Brown (1971)] extended to the multivariate case [Kundu et al. (2000), Th. 1.3]. To apply these conditions, we first define triangular filtration and the appropriate martingales. We denote by
в„ұ
T
,
t
{\cal F}_{T,t}
the information generated by the array
Y
T
,
П„
,
П„
вүӨ
t
Y_{T,\tau},\;\tau\leq t
. Then, we consider the transformations
g
j
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
g_{j}^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{0},0)
,
g
j
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
вҖӢ
g
k
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
вҲ’
h
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
,
j
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
g_{j}^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{0},0)g_{k}^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t-h};\theta_{0},0),\;j,k=1,...,K,\,h=1,...,H
. They can be written as a vector
G
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
G^{*}(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{0},0)
, say. Next, we transform this vector into a multivariate martingale difference array by considering:
X
T
,
t
=
1
T
вҖӢ
{
G
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
вҲ’
E
0
вҖӢ
[
G
вҖӢ
(
Y
~
T
,
t
;
Оё
0
,
0
)
|
в„ұ
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
]
}
.
X_{T,t}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\{G(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{0},0)-E_{0}[G(\tilde{Y}_{T,t};\theta_{0},0)|{\cal F}_{T,t-1}]\}.
The additional regularity conditions are the following:
Regularity Conditions for the CLT
i) The multivariate martingale difference array
X
T
,
t
X_{T,t}
has finite second-order moments.
ii) For any vector
b
b
of the same dimension as
X
T
,
t
X_{T,t}
, there exists a matrix
О©
\Omega
such that:
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
E
вҖӢ
[
(
b
вҖІ
вҖӢ
X
T
,
t
)
2
|
в„ұ
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
]
вҶ’
P
b
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О©
вҖӢ
b
.
\sum_{t=1}^{T}E[(b^{\prime}X_{T,t})^{2}|{\cal F}_{T,t-1}]\stackrel{{\scriptstyle P}}{{\rightarrow}}b^{\prime}\Omega b.
iii) Conditional Lindeberg-Feller condition:
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
E
вҖӢ
{
(
b
вҖІ
вҖӢ
X
T
,
t
)
2
вҖӢ
рқҹҸ
|
b
вҖІ
вҖӢ
X
T
,
t
|
>
Пө
|
в„ұ
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
}
вҶ’
P
0
,
for any
вҖӢ
b
вҖӢ
and
вҖӢ
Пө
>
0
.
\sum_{t=1}^{T}E\{(b^{\prime}X_{T,t})^{2}\mathbf{1}_{|b^{\prime}X_{T,t}|>\epsilon}|{\cal F}_{T,t-1}\}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle P}}{{\rightarrow}}0,\;\mbox{for any }b\;\mbox{and}\;\epsilon>0.
These regularity conditions ensure that the sum
S
T
=
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
X
T
,
t
S_{T}=\sum_{t=1}^{T}X_{T,t}
tends in distribution to the multivariate Gaussian distribution
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
О©
)
N(0,\Omega)
. Then we get the asymptotic normality of the estimated autocovariances under the sequence of local alternatives by applying the Slutsky Theorem.
Proposition B2:
Under the sequence of local alternatives and the regularity conditions 1-5, the vectors
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]
are asymptotically independent, normally distributed with mean
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
\Delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)
defined in (3.10) and variance-covariance matrix
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
)
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
)
\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0})\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0})
.
Thus, the behavior of the estimated autocovariances differs from the behavior under the null by the presence of the asymptotic bias measured by
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
\Delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)
.
We have introduced a set of regularity conditions to derive the asymptotic behavior of the estimated autocovariances.
Let us now explain why this set of conditions is also sufficient to derive the asymptotic behavior of the GCov estimator and of the GCov specification test statistic. First, we review the standard expansions under the null hypothesis. Next, we derive their analogues under the sequence of local alternatives, before applying the CLT to the estimated autocovariances of a triangular array.
B.3 First-order Expansion of the GCov Estimator under the Null Hypothesis
Below we recall the results under the null hypothesis derived in Gourieroux and Jasiak (2023). Let us consider
H
=
1
H=1
for ease of exposition. The first-order conditions of the GCov estimator are
вҲӮ
T
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
R
^
2
вҖӢ
(
1
;
Оё
j
)
вҲӮ
Оё
j
=
0
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
J
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
Оё
)
,
\frac{\partial Tr\hat{R}^{2}(1;\theta_{j})}{\partial\theta_{j}}=0,\;\;\;j=1,...,J=dim(\theta),
Let us define:
A
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
=
2
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
;
Оё
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
,
A(\theta_{0})=2\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(1;\theta_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta}[\Gamma(0;\theta_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma(0;\theta_{0})^{-1}],
and
J
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
=
вҲ’
2
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
;
Оё
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
1
;
Оё
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
.
J(\theta_{0})=-2\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(1;\theta_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta}[\Gamma(0;\theta_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma(0;\theta_{0})^{-1}]\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(1;\theta_{0})}{\partial\theta}.
The first-order Taylor series expansion of the GCov estimator is:
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
T
^
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
=
J
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҖӢ
A
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
1
;
Оё
0
)
вҖІ
]
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta_{T}}-\theta_{0})=J(\theta_{0})^{-1}A(\theta_{0})vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(1;\theta_{0})^{\prime}]+o_{p}(1),
(B.3)
B.4 Expansion of the Portmanteau Statistic under the Null Hypothesis
The expansion of the test statistic under the null hypothesis is:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
]
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
]
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\begin{split}\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}]^{\prime}\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}]+o_{p}(1),\end{split}
(B.4)
[See Gourieroux and Jasiak, вҖқGeneralized Covariance Estimator Supplemental MaterialвҖқ (2023), equation (a.11)], where:
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
\displaystyle\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})
=
\displaystyle=
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҲ’
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
\displaystyle[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]-[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}
{
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖӢ
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲӮ
Оё
}
вҲ’
1
\displaystyle\left\{\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta}[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}]\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})}{\partial\theta}\right\}^{-1}
Г—
вҲӮ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
вҲӮ
Оё
вҖІ
вҖӢ
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
.
\displaystyle\times\frac{\partial vec\Gamma(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}}{\partial\theta^{\prime}}[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{-1}].
Matrix
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})
satisfies for all
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
h=1,...,H
the condition:
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖӢ
V
a
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
y
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
)
вҖІ
]
вҖӢ
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
=
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
,
\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})V_{asy}[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h,\theta_{0})^{\prime}]\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})=\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0}),
where
V
a
вҖӢ
s
вҖӢ
y
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖІ
]
=
[
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҠ—
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
0
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
]
V_{asy}[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h,\theta_{0},f_{0})^{\prime}]=[\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})\otimes\Gamma_{0}(0,\theta_{0},f_{0})]
.
This condition means that the matrix
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})
has an interpretation in terms of an orthogonal projector.
Therefore, under the null hypothesis, the quadratic form (A.10), where the
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
(
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
)
vec(\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{0},f_{0}))
are independent identically distributed, still follows a chi-square distribution with a reduced degree of freedom.
B.5 Asymptotic Behavior Under the Local Alternatives
Under the regularity conditions 1-6, it is easy to see that expansions similar to (B.3)-(B.4) are still valid under the sequence of local alternatives by using the LLN for triangular arrays and the convergence of order
1
/
T
1/\sqrt{T}
of the estimated autocovariances that follows from the CLT. For example, we still have the Taylor series expansion:
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
{
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
вҖӢ
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
}
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}\{vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]\}+o_{p}(1),
similar to expansion (B.4) where the vectors
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
T
,
Оі
T
,
f
0
)
]
vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h;\theta_{T},\gamma_{T},f_{0})]
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
h=1,...,H
, are now asymptotically independent with the distribution:
N
вҖӢ
[
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
,
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
]
,
N[\delta(h;\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu),\Gamma(0;\theta_{0},f_{0})\otimes\Gamma(0;\theta_{0},f_{0})],
by the CLT.
Then, under the sequence of local alternatives, the asymptotic distribution of
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)
is a chi-square distribution with the non-centrality parameter
О»
\lambda
:
О»
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
,
Оё
0
,
f
0
,
Ој
,
ОҪ
)
,
\lambda(\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)=\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}\delta(h,\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu)^{\prime}\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})\delta(h,\theta_{0},f_{0},\mu,\nu),
and a degree of freedom equal to the rank of matrix
О 
вҖӢ
(
H
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
=
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
[
О 
вҖӢ
(
h
;
Оё
0
,
f
0
)
]
\Pi(H;\theta_{0},f_{0})=diag[\Pi(h;\theta_{0},f_{0})]
, where diag denotes a diagonal matrix.
B.6 The Properties of the Independence Test under Local Alternatives
The results of Section B.5 can be applied to test the null hypothesis
H
0
=
(
y
t
=
u
t
)
H_{0}=(y_{t}=u_{t})
without the parameter
Оё
\theta
(NLSD test) and other forms of local alternatives.
Let us consider the test of the absence of linear dependence in the time series
y
t
=
u
t
,
t
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
T
y_{t}=u_{t},t=1,...,T
against the local alternatives of an autoregressive form. More specifically, we test
H
0
:
{
О“
0
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
0
,
вҲҖ
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
=
{
B
1
=
вӢҜ
=
B
H
=
0
}
,
H_{0}:\{\Gamma_{0}(h)=0,\forall h=1,...,H\}=\{B_{1}=\cdots=B_{H}=0\},
against the local alternatives. The local alternatives can be defined in terms of the autoregressive parameters
B
1
,
вҖҰ
,
B
H
B_{1},...,B_{H}
, or equivalently in terms of the autocovariances
О“
вҖӢ
(
h
)
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
\Gamma(h),h=1,...,H
. Thus, the additional parameter
Оі
\gamma
is not necessarily a scalar. We follow the latter approach with the sequence of local alternatives:
H
1
,
T
=
{
О“
T
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
)
/
T
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
=
{
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О“
T
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
/
T
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
}
,
H_{1,T}=\{\Gamma_{T}(h)=\Delta(h)/\sqrt{T},\;h=1,...,H\}=\{vec\Gamma_{T}(h)=\delta(h)/\sqrt{T},\;h=1,...,H\},
with
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
О”
вҖӢ
(
h
)
\delta(h)=vec\Delta(h)
.
Under the sequence of local alternatives, the estimated autocovariances are asymptotically independent with the asymptotic normal distributions.
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
]
вҖӢ
вҲј
рқ‘Һ
вҖӢ
N
вҖӢ
[
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
,
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
]
.
vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h)^{\prime}]\overset{a}{\sim}N[\delta(h),\Gamma(0)\otimes\Gamma(0)].
Hence:
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
]
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
e
вҖӢ
c
вҖӢ
[
T
вҖӢ
О“
^
T
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
]
вҖӢ
вҲј
рқ‘Һ
вҖӢ
N
вҖӢ
[
(
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
)
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
,
I
вҖӢ
d
]
[\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}]vec[\sqrt{T}\hat{\Gamma}_{T}(h)^{\prime}]\overset{a}{\sim}N[(\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1/2})\delta(h),Id]
It follows that the portmanteau statistic
Оҫ
^
T
вҖӢ
(
H
)
\hat{\xi}_{T}(H)
has asymptotically, under the sequence of local alternatives, a chi-square
ПҮ
2
вҖӢ
(
K
2
вҖӢ
H
,
О»
)
\chi^{2}(K^{2}H,\lambda)
distribution with the non-centrality parameter
О»
\lambda
, where
О»
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
]
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
/
2
]
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
=
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
вҖІ
вҖӢ
[
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
вҠ—
О“
вҖӢ
(
0
)
вҲ’
1
]
вҖӢ
Оҙ
вҖӢ
(
h
)
,
\lambda=\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}\delta(h)^{\prime}[\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}][\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1/2}]\delta(h)=\displaystyle\sum_{h=1}^{H}\delta(h)^{\prime}[\Gamma(0)^{-1}\otimes\Gamma(0)^{-1}]\delta(h),
(B.5)
is the non-centrality parameter.
B.7 Regularity Conditions for Bootstrapping the Test Statistic (finite number of autocovariance conditions)
In the literature, an approach with a finite number of nonlinear moment conditions in
u
t
u_{t}
has not yet been developed. Inoue and Shintani (2006) consider the block bootstrap with a finite number of moment conditions that are linear in
u
u
. Escanciano (2007), Section 3 considers wild bootstrap with an infinite number of moment conditions also linear in
u
u
, while Wan and Davis (2022) study  a parametric bootstrap with infinite number of nonlinear sine and cosine transformations
18
18
18
Cavaliere, Nielsen and Rahbek (2020) develop a bootstrap approach for the OLS estimator of autoregressive coefficient
ПҒ
\rho
in a noncausal AR(1) model:
y
t
=
ПҒ
вҖӢ
y
t
+
1
+
u
t
y_{t}=\rho y_{t+1}+u_{t}
, where
u
t
u_{t}
has a stable distribution. In their framework the coefficient
ПҒ
\rho
is not equal to
C
вҖӢ
o
вҖӢ
v
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
y
t
вҲ’
1
)
/
V
вҖӢ
a
вҖӢ
r
вҖӢ
(
y
t
вҲ’
1
)
Cov(y_{t},y_{t-1})/Var(y_{t-1})
, because the theoretical moments may not exist. Hence, the OLS estimator is not a moment (or covariance) estimator, and their theoretical results cannot be applied to our framework.
. The approach proposed in our paper is based on a statistic that is nonlinear in
u
u
with a finite number of nonlinear transformations and a finite lag
H
H
, and differs from the literature in this respect.
For ease of exposition, let us consider
H
=
1
H=1
,
d
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
m
вҖӢ
(
u
t
)
=
1
dim(u_{t})=1
,
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
u_{t}(\theta_{0})
with a symmetric density
f
0
f_{0}
satisfying:
sup
u
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
/
exp
вҒЎ
(
b
вҖӢ
|
u
|
)
<
вҲһ
,
for
вҖӢ
b
>
0
,
\sup_{u}f_{0}(u)/\exp(b|u|){\color[rgb]{0,0,0}<}\infty,\;\mbox{for}\;b>0,
(B.6)
and a GCov estimator based on a finite number of transformations
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
)
=
|
u
|
p
k
вҖӢ
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
k
вҖӢ
|
u
|
)
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
a_{k}(u)=|u|^{p_{k}}\exp(-t_{k}|u|),k=1,...,K
, where
p
k
,
t
k
p_{k},t_{k}
are fixed. The tail condition (B.6) ensures the uniform integrability of all moments
E
вҖӢ
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
)
Ea_{k}(u_{t}(\theta_{0}))
by
considering transformations that reduce the effect of the tail. We also assume
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
)
=
g
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
вҖҰ
,
y
t
вҲ’
p
;
Оё
)
g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta)=g(y_{t},...,y_{t-p};\theta)
, and we distinguish the following regularity conditions for bootstrap validity:
i) Regularity conditions for deriving the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic under the null hypotheses of i.i.d. errors
u
t
=
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
u_{t}=u_{t}(\theta_{0})
.
ii) Conditions concerning the third term in the Edgeworth expansion for the refinement of the bootstrap procedure
iii) Additional regularity conditions to ensure the consistency of the bootstrap approach.
Let us now discuss these regularity conditions.
i) Regularity conditions for deriving the asymptotic distribution of the bootstrap-adjusted portmanteau test statistic under the null hypothesis of serial independence.
These conditions have already been discussed in Appendices B.1-B.4.
As a consequence of these regularity conditions, we have the asymptotic equivalence of the GCov estimator:
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
вүЎ
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}-\theta_{0})\equiv\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\sum_{t=1}^{T}m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}(\theta_{0})},\theta_{0})+o_{p}(1),
(B.7)
where
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
ВҜ
=
(
u
t
,
u
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
)
\underline{u_{t}(\theta_{0})}=(u_{t},u_{t-1},...)
, and
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}},\theta_{0})
is a vector-valued function satisfying the martingale difference sequence condition
E
вҖӢ
(
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
|
u
t
вҲ’
1
ВҜ
)
=
0
E(m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}},\theta_{0})|\underline{u_{t-1}})=0
,
E
|
|
m
T
(
u
t
ВҜ
)
,
Оё
0
|
|
2
<
вҲһ
E||m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}}),\theta_{0}||^{2}<\infty
. An expression of
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
,
Оё
0
)
m_{T}(u_{t}(\theta_{0}),\theta_{0})
can be easily deduced from (B.3). Then, we observe that the empirical process
(
1
T
вҖӢ
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}(\theta_{0})},\theta_{0})
converges in distribution to a Gaussian process (as a triangular array), and we
deduce the asymptotic distribution of the test statistic from its asymptotic expansion.
ii) Conditions for refinement in the third-order Edgeworth expansion
The function
m
T
m_{T}
in (B.7) is not uniquely defined, since it can always be modified by a term
B
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
/
T
B(\theta_{0})/T
of order
1
/
T
1/T
. Additional conditions can be introduced, especially on the third-order derivatives of
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
,
Оё
)
g(\tilde{y}_{t},\theta)
with respect to
Оё
\theta
[see, e.g., Leucht and Neuman (2003)]. Then, we get:
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
^
T
вҲ’
Оё
0
)
вүЎ
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
+
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
/
T
)
.
\sqrt{T}(\hat{\theta}_{T}-\theta_{0})\equiv\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\sum_{t=1}^{T}m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}(\theta_{0})},\theta_{0})+o_{p}(1/T).
(B.8)
In this expansion, the function
m
T
m_{T}
depends on the function
g
g
and the transforms
a
k
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
a_{k},k=1,...,K
. It has a closed-form expression, even though it is complicated. In fact, we only need the existence of such an expansion, and the convergence in distribution of the empirical process
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
ВҜ
,
Оё
0
)
\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\sum_{t=1}^{T}m_{T}(\underline{u_{t}(\theta_{0})},\theta_{0})
to a Gaussian process. This will imply an asymptotically pivotal test statistic at order 1 under (B.7), and at order
1
/
T
1/T
under (B.8).
iii) Regularity conditions to ensure the consistency of the bootstrap under the null hypothesis of serial independence.
These conditions have to be introduced for the validity of the bootstrap under the null hypothesis
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{0,iid}
. Below, we describe sets of sufficient conditions introduced in Wan and Davis (2022) that are specific to this bootstrap procedure
19
19
19
See also Escanciano (2007), Assumption A.5 for a sufficient high-level condition for the validity of the bootstrap, when the moment condition is linear in
u
t
u_{t}
.
and concern functions
m
T
m_{T}
in the expansion (B.7) (resp.(B.8)). These high level regularity conditions correspond to the assumptions M3, M3вҖҷ, M1вҖҷ in Wan and Davis (2022), provided below and adapted to our framework of a finite set of nonlinear autocovariance conditions. They are valid for causal models when
u
t
u_{t}
is a nonlinear innovation of process
(
y
t
)
(y_{t})
[Gourieroux and Jasiak (2005)]
20
20
20
They can also be used for pure noncausal processes, i.e., when
u
t
u_{t}
is a nonlinear innovation in reversed time. In this case, the innovations as well as their bootstrapped values have to be defined in reverse time.
Assumption M3:
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
|
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
)
вҲ’
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
^
вҲһ
,
t
)
|
m
=
o
p
вҖӢ
(
1
)
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
,
m
=
1
,
2
,
\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\sum_{t=1}^{T}|a_{k}(\hat{u}_{T,t})-a_{k}(\hat{u}_{\infty,t})|^{m}=o_{p}(1),k=1,...,K,\;m=1,2,
where
u
^
вҲһ
,
t
\hat{u}_{\infty,t}
denotes the fitted residual based on an infinite sequence of observations.
Assumption M3вҖҷ: For any
Пө
>
0
\epsilon>0
,
P
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
|
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
)
вҲ’
a
k
вҖӢ
(
u
^
вҲһ
,
t
s
)
|
m
>
Пө
]
вҶ’
0
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
,
m
=
1
,
2
,
{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}P^{*}}[\frac{1}{\sqrt{T}}\sum_{t=1}^{T}|a_{k}(\hat{u}_{T,t}^{s})-a_{k}(\hat{u}_{\infty,t}^{s})|^{m}>\epsilon]\rightarrow 0,k=1,...,K,\;m=1,2,
when
T
T
tends to infinity, where
u
^
вҲһ
,
t
s
\hat{u}_{\infty,t}^{s}
denotes the bootstrapped residuals based on an infinite sequence of observations.
In comparison with the analogous assumption in Wan and Davis (2022), the condition
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
=
g
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
вҖҰ
,
y
t
вҲ’
p
;
Оё
0
)
u_{t}(\theta_{0})=g(y_{t},...,y_{t-p};\theta_{0})
is equivalent to
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
k
вҖӢ
u
t
вҖӢ
(
Оё
0
)
)
\exp(-t_{k}u_{t}(\theta_{0}))
=
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
t
k
вҖӢ
g
вҖӢ
(
y
t
,
вҖҰ
,
y
t
вҲ’
p
;
Оё
0
)
)
=\exp(-t_{k}g(y_{t},...,y_{t-p};\theta_{0}))
for example.
Assumption M1вҖҷ: For any
Пө
>
0
\epsilon>0
and some
П„
>
0
\tau>0
:
P
вҲ—
(
|
1
T
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
E
вҲ—
[
m
T
вҖІ
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
ВҜ
,
Оё
^
T
)
m
T
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
ВҜ
,
Оё
^
T
)
|
u
^
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
s
ВҜ
]
вҲ’
П„
2
|
>
Пө
)
вҶ’
p
0
,
{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}P^{*}}(|\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}E^{*}}[m_{T}^{\prime}(\underline{\hat{u}^{s}_{T,t}},\hat{\theta}_{T})m_{T}(\underline{\hat{u}^{s}_{T,t}},\hat{\theta}_{T})|\underline{\hat{u}_{T,t-1}^{s}}]-\tau^{2}|>\epsilon)\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}0,
when
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
T\rightarrow\infty
and
P
вҲ—
вҖӢ
(
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
T
E
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
m
T
вҖІ
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
ВҜ
,
Оё
^
T
)
вҖӢ
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
ВҜ
,
Оё
^
T
)
вҖӢ
1
вҖ–
m
T
вҖӢ
(
u
^
T
,
t
s
ВҜ
,
Оё
^
T
)
вҖ–
>
T
вҖӢ
Пө
|
u
^
T
,
t
вҲ’
1
s
ВҜ
]
>
Пө
)
вҶ’
p
0
,
{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}P^{*}}(\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}E^{*}}[m_{T}^{\prime}(\underline{\hat{u}^{s}_{T,t}},\hat{\theta}_{T})m_{T}(\underline{\hat{u}^{s}_{T,t}},\hat{\theta}_{T})1_{||m_{T}(\underline{\hat{u}^{s}_{T,t}},\hat{\theta}_{T})||>\sqrt{T}\epsilon}|\underline{\hat{u}_{T,t-1}^{s}}]>\epsilon)\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}0,
when
T
вҶ’
вҲһ
T\rightarrow\infty
,
where
P
вҲ—
,
E
вҲ—
P^{*},E^{*}
are taken with respect to the bootstrap sampling conditional on the observations
Y
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Y
T
Y_{1},...,Y_{T}
, and
вҶ’
p
\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}
denotes the convergence in probability.
Assumption M1вҖҷ ensures that the martingale difference sequence condition is asymptotically satisfied at order 1 by the bootstrapped residuals.
Then, we can apply Theorem 4.2 in Wan and Davis (2022) to obtain the consistency of the bootstrap-adjusted GCov test statistic:
sup
z
|
P
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
Оҫ
^
T
s
<
z
]
вҲ’
P
вҖӢ
[
Оҫ
~
T
<
z
]
|
вҶ’
p
0
,
\sup_{z}|{\color[rgb]{0,0,0}P^{*}}[\hat{\xi}_{T}^{s}<z]-P[\tilde{\xi}_{T}<z]|\stackrel{{\scriptstyle p}}{{\rightarrow}}0,
where
P
вҲ—
P^{*}
stands for conditional on data, and
Оҫ
~
T
\tilde{\xi}_{T}
is the value of
Оҫ
T
\xi_{T}
adjusted for its first-order bias.
The local power analysis in Section 4.2 is based on Escanciano (2007), Section 3, Theorem 6, where a two-step parametric bootstrap is considered. The validity of the second step bootstrap is established for the wild bootstrap and extended to parametric bootstrap with conventional drawing on page 126.
B.8
Additional Regularity Conditions for an Infinite Set of Nonlinear Autocovariance Conditions
This Appendix provides the regularity conditions for the results on the asymptotic behavior of the GCov portmanteau test statistics.
We consider below the GCov statistic
Оҫ
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\xi}_{n,T}
based on
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
. The asymptotic behavior of this statistic is derived along the following steps:
step 1: We consider the infeasible portmanteau test statistic:
Оҫ
n
,
T
0
=
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
h
=
1
H
вҲ‘
j
=
1
K
n
вҲ‘
k
=
1
K
n
(
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
+
h
T
a
j
,
n
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
;
Оё
0
)
]
вҖӢ
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
вҲ’
h
;
Оё
0
)
]
)
2
,
\xi_{n,T}^{0}=T\sum_{h=1}^{H}\sum_{j=1}^{K_{n}}\sum_{k=1}^{K_{n}}\left(\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1+h}^{T}a_{j,n}^{*}[g(\tilde{y}_{t};\theta_{0})]a_{k,n}^{*}[g(\tilde{y}_{t-h};\theta_{0})]\right)^{2},
where
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
a_{k,n}^{*}
are the transformations obtained from orthonormalization performed given the true distribution
f
0
f_{0}
.
The analysis of the asymptotic properties of this theoretical infeasible statistic needs to take into account the increasing sequence
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
and the theoretical regularization used in the orthonormalization.
step 2: We take into account the uncertainties due to the estimation of
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
and
f
0
f_{0}
, and the replacement of
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
by the starting value
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
.
Step 1 Regularity Conditions
These regularity conditions concern the theoretical orthonormal bases of
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
. i.e.,
a
j
,
n
вҲ—
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
a^{*}_{j,n},j=1,...,n
.
Let us assume that
u
t
u_{t}
has non-negative components, and a continuous density
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
f_{0}(u)
that satisfies a tail condition:
sup
u
>
0
f
0
вҖӢ
(
u
)
/
exp
вҒЎ
(
b
вҖІ
вҖӢ
u
)
<
вҲһ
,
for some
вҖӢ
b
,
\sup_{u>0}f_{0}(u)/\exp(b^{\prime}u)<\infty,\;\mbox{for some}\;b,
with strictly positive components, ensuring that the transformations in
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
are uniformly integrable. Then, under the hypothesis
H
0
,
i
вҖӢ
i
вҖӢ
d
H_{0,iid}
of i.i.d.
u
t
=
g
вҖӢ
(
y
~
t
,
Оё
0
)
u_{t}=g(\tilde{y}_{t},\theta_{0})
, for any fixed
K
n
K_{n}
, the multidimensional Lindeberg-Feller condition for the convergence in distribution of:
1
T
вҖӢ
вҲ‘
t
=
1
+
h
T
a
j
,
n
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
u
t
]
вҖӢ
a
k
,
n
вҲ—
вҖӢ
[
u
t
вҲ’
h
]
,
j
,
k
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
,
h
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
H
.
\frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1+h}^{T}a_{j,n}^{*}[u_{t}]a_{k,n}^{*}[u_{t-h}],\;j,k=1,...,K_{n},\;h=1,...,H.
to a standard normal
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
I
вҖӢ
d
K
n
2
вҖӢ
H
)
N(0,Id_{K_{n}^{2}H})
is satisfied. Then, under the assumption of an increasing sequence
рқ’ң
n
\mathcal{A}_{n}
with a dense
вӢғ
n
рқҗҖ
n
\bigcup_{n}\mathbf{A}_{n}
and a tightness condition [see Koenker and Machado (1999)], we get the analogue of Proposition 5 for the theoretical infeasible portmanteau test statistic:
Proposition 5вҖҷ
[Koenker and Machado (1999)]
(
Оҫ
n
,
T
0
вҲ’
H
вҖӢ
K
n
2
)
/
2
вҖӢ
H
вҖӢ
K
n
2
вҶ’
d
N
вҖӢ
(
0
,
1
)
,
(\xi_{n,T}^{0}-HK_{n}^{2})/\sqrt{2HK_{n}^{2}}\stackrel{{\scriptstyle d}}{{\rightarrow}}N(0,1),
when
T
T
and
K
n
K_{n}
tend to infinity.
Step 2 Regularity Conditions
The two-step estimator-based statistic
Оҫ
^
n
,
T
=
Оҫ
n
,
T
вҖӢ
(
Оё
~
~
n
,
T
)
\hat{\xi}_{n,T}=\xi_{n,T}(\tilde{\tilde{\theta}}_{n,T})
has the standard normal asymptotic distribution
provided that:
a) the first-step estimator
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
is consistent, asymptotically normally distributed; b) the regularization tuning parameter
Пө
n
,
T
\epsilon_{n,T}
tends to zero at an adequate rate; c)
T
T
and
K
n
K_{n}
tend to infinity at a rate such that
K
n
2
/
T
K_{n}^{2}/T
tends to zero.
Under an additional tightness condition, the difference between
a
j
,
n
,
T
вҲ—
a^{*}_{j,n,T}
and
a
j
,
n
вҲ—
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
K
n
a^{*}_{j,n},j=1,...,K_{n}
is asymptotically negligible when
K
n
K_{n}
tends to infinity.
These conditions ensure that the uncertainty due to the approximation of
Оё
0
\theta_{0}
by
Оё
~
n
,
T
\tilde{\theta}_{n,T}
and of the true orthonormalization by the estimated one are negligible [see e.g., Dovonon and Gospodinov (2024) for a similar argument].
Appendix C
This Appendix provides additional results based on the simulations and empirical application.
C.1 Simulations for NLSD and GCov Test
Table 5 presents the comprehensive results for the empirical size and power of NLSD, with some rows also provided in Table 1 of the main text.
Table 6
:
NLSD Test of the absence of (non)linear dependence against the fixed alternative of MAR(0,1) at 5% significance level: size and power
Оі
\gamma
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
0.0
0.0414
0.0484
0.0512
0.0450
0.0502
0.0518
0.0496
0.0540
0.0480
0.1
0.0878
0.0706
0.0684
0.1502
0.1360
0.1220
0.3760
0.3390
0.3572
0.2
0.2682
0.2202
0.2240
0.5618
0.5390
0.5322
0.9586
0.9546
0.9570
0.3
0.6014
0.5742
0.5674
0.9202
0.9266
0.9256
1
0.9998
1
0.4
0.8754
0.8814
0.8754
0.9966
0.9988
0.9976
1
1
1
0.5
0.9796
0.9822
0.9856
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.6
0.998
0.9986
0.9998
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.8
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.9
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
The first row (
Оі
=
0
\gamma=0
) shows the size of the test and the remaining rows show the size-adjusted power against fixed alternatives.
Table 6 illustrates the power of the GCov specification test for the values of
Оі
\gamma
between 0.1 and 0.9 under the fixed alternative, completing the results given in Table 2.
Table 7
:
Power of GCov specification test of MAR(0,1) against the fixed alternative of MAR(1,1) at 5% significance level
ПҲ
\psi
Оі
=
П•
\gamma=\phi
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
0.3
0.1
0.0226
0.0528
0.0446
0.0394
0.0672
0.0616
0.0572
0.0758
0.0752
0.2
0.0276
0.0626
0.0568
0.0720
0.0956
0.0980
0.1986
0.1624
0.1880
0.3
0.0416
0.0850
0.0866
0.1364
0.1612
0.1748
0.5244
0.3898
0.4162
0.4
0.0568
0.1080
0.1242
0.1796
0.2286
0.2394
0.6136
0.5280
0.5590
0.5
0.0604
0.1238
0.1346
0.2174
0.2568
0.2696
0.8000
0.6812
0.7002
0.6
0.0642
0.1276
0.1332
0.2504
0.3070
0.3216
0.8286
0.7898
0.7938
0.7
0.0746
0.1460
0.1518
0.2796
0.3614
0.3796
0.8722
0.8644
0.8634
0.8
0.1016
0.1724
0.1788
0.3404
0.4468
0.4672
0.9092
0.9282
0.9300
0.9
0.2100
0.2478
0.2552
0.5486
0.6180
0.6174
0.9804
0.9846
0.9862
0.7
0.1
0.0182
0.0500
0.0378
0.0374
0.0702
0.0664
0.1174
0.1224
0.1140
0.2
0.0296
0.0718
0.0628
0.1012
0.1456
0.1454
0.5346
0.4464
0.4602
0.3
0.0656
0.1430
0.1526
0.2854
0.3712
0.3764
0.8908
0.8630
0.8654
0.4
0.1578
0.3120
0.3098
0.5718
0.7040
0.6852
0.9926
0.9950
0.9908
0.5
0.3392
0.5700
0.5490
0.8318
0.9316
0.9196
1
1
0.9996
0.6
0.6034
0.8144
0.7848
0.9690
0.9914
0.9898
1
1
1
0.7
0.8528
0.9424
0.9370
0.9990
0.9996
1
1
1
1
0.8
0.9680
0.9882
0.9896
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.9
0.9970
0.9980
0.9990
1
1
1
1
1
1
The following Tables 7 and 8 provide additional simulation results on the NLSD and GCov specification tests, respectively.
Table
8
provides the results on the size of the NLSD test for local alternatives and
Оҙ
\delta
increasing from 0 to 0.9.
Table
9
shows the size of the GCov specification test for fixed alternatives and different values of
ПҲ
\psi
.
Table 8
:
Test of the absence of (non)linear dependence (MAR(0,0)) against local MAR(0,1) alternatives at 5% significance level: size and size-adjusted power
Оі
T
=
\gamma_{T}=
T=100
T=200
T=500
Оҙ
T
\frac{\delta}{\sqrt{T}}
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
0
T
\frac{0}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0414
0.0484
0.0512
0.0450
0.0502
0.0518
0.0496
0.0540
0.0480
0.1
T
\frac{0.1}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0498
0.0494
0.0470
0.0496
0.0490
0.0504
0.0512
0.0494
0.0508
0.2
T
\frac{0.2}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0498
0.0488
0.0460
0.0502
0.0496
0.0496
0.0528
0.0492
0.0514
0.3
T
\frac{0.3}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0516
0.0474
0.0464
0.0506
0.0524
0.0486
0.0544
0.0504
0.0540
0.4
T
\frac{0.4}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0526
0.0486
0.0474
0.0530
0.0536
0.0500
0.0564
0.0520
0.0564
0.5
T
\frac{0.5}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0574
0.0502
0.0486
0.0556
0.0568
0.0524
0.0606
0.0550
0.0602
0.6
T
\frac{0.6}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0596
0.0530
0.0492
0.0606
0.0610
0.0548
0.0648
0.0584
0.0642
0.7
T
\frac{0.7}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0650
0.0552
0.0520
0.0664
0.0662
0.0606
0.0710
0.0620
0.0710
0.8
T
\frac{0.8}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0714
0.0580
0.0564
0.0756
0.0742
0.0652
0.0772
0.0664
0.0774
0.9
T
\frac{0.9}{\sqrt{T}}
0.0804
0.0640
0.0622
0.0838
0.0812
0.0714
0.0860
0.0758
0.0848
The first row (
ПҲ
=
0
\psi=0
) shows the size of the test and the remaining rows show the power against local alternatives with
Оі
T
=
ПҲ
T
=
Оҙ
T
\gamma_{T}=\psi_{T}=\frac{\delta}{\sqrt{T}}
.
Table 9
:
Size of GCov specification test of MAR(0,1) at 5% significance level
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
0.1
0.0212
0.0404
0.0378
0.0342
0.0538
0.0514
0.0408
0.0538
0.0544
0.2
0.0216
0.0414
0.0390
0.0344
0.0548
0.0534
0.0414
0.0558
0.0560
0.3
0.0224
0.0454
0.0386
0.0348
0.0566
0.0534
0.0406
0.0544
0.0560
0.4
0.0214
0.0460
0.0390
0.0344
0.0560
0.0522
0.0414
0.0548
0.0540
0.5
0.0194
0.0450
0.0382
0.0326
0.0550
0.0518
0.0414
0.0548
0.0540
0.6
0.0196
0.0428
0.0348
0.0318
0.0536
0.0492
0.0426
0.0560
0.0544
0.7
0.0200
0.0400
0.0338
0.0298
0.0528
0.0468
0.0408
0.0552
0.0528
0.8
0.0202
0.0392
0.0316
0.0296
0.0512
0.0454
0.0396
0.0532
0.0500
0.9
0.0178
0.0384
0.0310
0.0278
0.0508
0.0428
0.0350
0.0494
0.0498
C.2 GCov Specification Test for Processes with Cauchy Error Distribution
Table 10:
Size and power of GCov specification test of the MAR(0,1) with Cauchy error distribution at 5% significance level
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T
100
200
300
400
500
S.
0.3
0.0306
0.0468
0.0472
0.0552
0.0538
0.7
0.0342
0.0440
0.0470
0.0558
0.0518
P.
0.8
0.3
0.7526
0.9724
0.9990
1
1
0.8
0.7
0.9994
1
1
1
1
Table 11:
Size and power of bootstrap test with and without replacement, MAR(0,1) with Cauchy error distribution at 5% significance level with estimation by OLS
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
with
without
with
without
with
without
S.
0.3
0.077
0.080
0.056
0.078
0.050
0.073
0.7
0.075
0.091
0.054
0.087
0.048
0.077
P.
0.8
0.3
0.808
0.802
0.880
0.915
0.986
0.988
0.8
0.7
0.999
1.000
1.000
1
1
1
C.3 Distribution of GCov bootstrap test statistic
(a)
T
=
100
T=100
(b)
T
=
500
T=500
Figure 5:
Comparison of the distributions of
Оҫ
s
\xi_{s}
and
Оҫ
s
^
\hat{\xi_{s}}
for MAR(0,1) with t(5) error distribution and
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
Table 12
:
Bootstrap approximation size and power of GCov specification based on GCov estimation of MAR(0,1), at 5% significance level
A:
without replacement and
B:
with replacement
Panel
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
Uniform
Laplace
t(5)
A
S.
0
0.3
0.051
0.067
0.064
0.060
0.056
0.053
0.063
0.061
0.046
0
0.7
0.052
0.066
0.066
0.062
0.054
0.053
0.064
0.064
0.046
P.
0.8
0.3
0.227
0.361
0.365
0.454
0.529
0.566
0.946
0.936
0.941
0.8
0.7
0.982
0.990
0.998
1
1
1
1
1
1
B
S.
0
0.3
0.052
0.068
0.060
0.062
0.060
0.047
0.056
0.065
0.046
0
0.7
0.058
0.066
0.062
0.054
0.064
0.050
0.051
0.066
0.042
P.
0.8
0.3
0.219
0.349
0.375
0.456
0.540
0.589
0.936
0.936
0.950
0.8
0.7
0.985
0.989
0.996
1
1
1
1
1
1
S.: size, P.: power
Table 13
:
Size and power of GCov bootstrap test without replacement based on AML estimation of MAR(0,1), at 5% significance level
S./P.
П•
\phi
ПҲ
\psi
T=100
T=200
T=500
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
t(4)
t(5)
t(6)
S.
0
0.3
0.061
0.062
0.063
0.059
0.046
0.049
0.062
0.046
0.058
0
0.7
0.063
0.063
0.066
0.060
0.047
0.056
0.062
0.049
0.060
P.
0.8
0.3
0.438
0.412
0.399
0.706
0.671
0.633
0.982
0.986
0.980
0.8
0.7
0.991
0.992
0.993
1
1
1
1
1
1
S.: size, P.: power
Table 14
:
Empirical size and power of GCov test with many transformations at 5% significance level. For power, we generate MAR(1,1) with
П•
=
0.8
\phi=0.8
.
S./P.
H
H
T
T
K
=
7
K=7
K
=
8
K=8
K
=
9
K=9
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
ПҲ
=
0.3
\psi=0.3
ПҲ
=
0.7
\psi=0.7
S.
H
=
3
H=3
T
=
100
T=100
0.007
0.012
0.028
0.031
0.001
0.002
T
=
200
T=200
0.012
0.022
0.030
0.042
0.029
0.024
T
=
500
T=500
0.033
0.051
0.035
0.051
0.054
0.050
H
=
4
H=4
T
=
100
T=100
0.013
0.006
0.027
0.029
0.002
0.006
T
=
200
T=200
0.010
0.016
0.030
0.028
0.021
0.019
T
=
500
T=500
0.031
0.049
0.034
0.059
0.050
0.056
H
=
5
H=5
T
=
100
T=100
0.009
0.006
0.020
0.023
0.002
0.002
T
=
200
T=200
0.010
0.019
0.038
0.025
0.026
0.025
T
=
500
T=500
0.031
0.053
0.029
0.052
0.053
0.060
P.
H
=
3
H=3
T
=
100
T=100
0.549
0.503
0.201
0.356
0.139
0.213
T
=
200
T=200
0.703
0.771
0.231
0.318
0.454
0.665
T
=
500
T=500
0.703
0.897
0.535
0.529
0.567
0.877
H
=
4
H=4
T
=
100
T=100
0.498
0.467
0.198
0.327
0.141
0.193
T
=
200
T=200
0.695
0.752
0.215
0.307
0.437
0.626
T
=
500
T=500
0.664
0.889
0.528
0.514
0.571
0.872
H
=
5
H=5
T
=
100
T=100
0.440
0.406
0.179
0.320
0.120
0.168
T
=
200
T=200
0.680
0.723
0.194
0.298
0.428
0.594
T
=
500
T=500
0.673
0.891
0.493
0.486
0.552
0.863
C.4 Empirical Power of Specification Test Based on Many Transformations
(a)
T
=
500
T=500
(b)
T
=
5000
T=5000
Figure 6:
Empirical power of specification test based on
H
=
4
H=4
and
K
=
7
K=7
as a function of coefficient
П•
\phi
under the alternative with
t
вҖӢ
(
5
)
t(5)
error distribution.
Figure
6
provides empirical power of the specification test with many transformations. We generate MAR(1,1) and fit MAR(0,1) to the process; therefore,
П•
\phi
is our distance to the null hypothesis. For high persistence of noncausality, the power converges to one with both
T
=
500
T=500
and
T
=
5000
T=5000
. In both sample sizes, power decreases when
ПҲ
\psi
is low and
П•
\phi
gets closer to the unit root. It is due to the identification problem that when we get close to a unit root, the roots flip. Moreover, Figure
7
demonstrates the convergence of empirical power to one when we increase the sample size. The more persistence in noncausality, the faster we converge to one.
Figure 7:
Empirical power of specification test based on
H
=
4
H=4
and
K
=
7
K=7
with fixed
П•
=
0.6
\phi=0.6
as a function of the number of observation T with
t
вҖӢ
(
5
)
t(5)
error distribution.
C.5 Empirical Application
(a)
Demeaned-Detrended aluminum price
(b)
MAR(1,1) residuals
Figure 8:
Densities of demeaned aluminum price and MAR(1,1) residuals, compared with the normal density
(a)
ACF of the series
(b)
ACF of the series square
(c)
ACF of the residuals
(d)
ACF of the square of the residuals
Figure 9:
ACF of aluminum prices and squared prices (panels a and b) and MAR(1,1) residuals and squared residuals (panels c and d)
Figure 10:
MAR(1,1) causal-noncausal components
REFERENCES TO APPENDICES A-C
Andrews, D. (1988): вҖқLaws of Large Numbers for Dependent Non-Identically Distributed Random VariablesвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 4, 458-467.
Andrews, D. (1992): вҖқGeneric Uniform ConvergenceвҖқ, Econometric Theory, 8, 241-257.
Brown, B. (1971): вҖқMartingale Central Limit TheoremвҖқ, Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 42, 59-66
Cavaliere, G., Nielsen, H, and A. Rahbek (2020): вҖқBootstrapping Noncausal Autoregressions with Applications to Explosive Bubble ModellingвҖқ, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 38, 55-67.
Chitturi, R. (1974): вҖқDistribution of Residual Autocorrelations in Multiple Autoregressive SchemesвҖқ, JASA, 69, 928-934.
Chitturi, R. (1976): вҖқDistribution of Multivariate White Noise AutocorrelationsвҖқ, JASA, 71, 223-226.
De Jong, R. (1998): вҖқWeak Laws of Large Numbers for Dependent Random VariablesвҖқ, Annales dвҖҷEconomie et de Statistique, 51, 210-225.
Dovonon, P. and N. Gospodinov (2024): вҖқSpecification Testing for Conditional Moment Restrictions Under Local Identification FailureвҖқ, Quantitative Economics, forthcoming
Dvoretski, A. (1970): вҖқAsymptotic Normality for Sums of Dependent Random VariablesвҖқ, Proc. of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium on Math. Stat. and Prob., Vol II, 513-535.
Escanciano, M. (2007): вҖқModel Checks Using Residual Marked Empirical ProcessesвҖқ, Statistica Sinica, 17, 115-138
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2005): вҖқNonlinear Innovations and Impulse ResponsesвҖқ, Annals of Economics and Statistics, 78, 1-30
Gourieroux, C. and J. Jasiak (2023): вҖқGeneralized Covariance EstimatorвҖқ, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 41, 1315-1327.
Hannan, J. (1976): вҖқThe Asymptotic Distribution of Serial CovariancesвҖқ, Annals of Statistics, 4, 396-399.
Inoue, A. and M. Shintani (2006): Bootstrapping GMM Estimators for Time SeriesвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 133, 531-555.
Koenker, R. and J. Machado (1999) вҖқGMM Inference when the Number of Moment Conditions is LargeвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 93, 327-344
Kundu, S., Majumdar, S., and K. Mukherjee (2000): вҖқCentral Limit Theorems RevisitedвҖқ, Statistics and Probability Letters, 47, 265-275.
Leucht, A., and M. Neumann (2003): вҖқ Consistency of General Bootstrap Methods for degenerate U-Type and V-Type StatisticsвҖқ, Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 100, 1622-1633.
Wan, P., and R. Davis (2022): вҖқGoodness-of-Fit Testing for Time Series Models via Distance CovarianceвҖқ, Journal of Econometrics, 227(1), 4-24.
Generated  on Mon Nov  3 16:19:03 2025 by
L
a
T
e
XML