Time Series Analysis of Rankings: A GARCH-Type Approach
1
Introduction
2
Ranking GARCH Models
2.1
Data Generation
2.2
Stationarity and Ergodicity
3
Inference Under Complete Rankings
4
Estimation Under Incomplete Rankings
4.1
Monte Carlo EM Algorithm
4.2
MCEM Simulation Study
5
Application to Tennis Rankings
5.1
Incomplete Tennis Ranking Analysis
6
Conclusions
Time Series Analysis of Rankings:
A GARCH-Type Approach
Luiza S.C. Piancastelli
вҷҜ
1
1
1
e-mail
:
luiza.piancastelli@ucd.ie
and Wagner Barreto-Souza
вҷҜ
2
2
2
e-mail
:
wagner.barreto-souza@ucd.ie
вҷҜ
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University College Dublin, Belfield, Republic of Ireland
Abstract
Ranking data are frequently obtained nowadays but there are still scarce methods for treating these data when temporally observed. The present paper contributes to this topic by proposing and developing novel models for handling time series of ranking data. We introduce a class of time-varying ranking models inspired by the Generalized AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models. More specifically, the temporal dynamics are defined by the conditional distribution of the current ranking given the past rankings, which are assumed to follow a Mallows distribution, which implicitly depends on a distance. Then, autoregressive and feedback components are incorporated into the model through the conditional expectation of the associated distances. Theoretical properties of our ranking GARCH models such as stationarity and ergodicity are established. The estimation of parameters is performed via maximum likelihood estimation when data is fully observed. We develop a Monte Carlo Expectation-Maximisation algorithm to deal with cases involving missing data. Monte Carlo simulation studies are presented to study the performance of the proposed estimators under both non-missing and missing data scenarios. A real data application about the weekly ranking of professional tennis players from 2015 to 2019 is presented under our proposed ranking GARCH models.
Keywords
:
Kendall and Hamming distances, Mallows model, Monte Carlo EM algorithm, Ranking data, Stationarity.
1
Introduction
Ranking data arises in situations where some order is attributed to a set of alternatives. For example, marketing researchers often ask judges to order options from best to worst to understand their preferences. Sports and competitions are another context where rankings are common. For instance, they can represent leaderboards, teams standing on long-term championships, or racing results. Ranking information is increasingly common in modern technology, playing important roles in search engines and recommendation systems.
A complete ranking of a set of
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
distinct alternatives with arbitrary labels
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
}
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
\{1,\ldots,k\}
{ 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k }
will be denoted by
ПҖ
рқңӢ
\pi
italic_ПҖ
. The latter is a point in the space of permutations of
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
items,
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. The statistical analysis of ranking collections is a non-standard task where it must be acknowledged that data points carry multivariate relative information. A sample of
n
рқ‘ӣ
n
italic_n
observed rankings of
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
}
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
\{1,\ldots,k\}
{ 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k }
is represented as
ПҖ
ВҜ
ВҜ
рқңӢ
\underline{\pi}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
, where
ПҖ
ВҜ
ВҜ
рқңӢ
\underline{\pi}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
is a
n
Г—
k
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ҳ
n\times k
italic_n Г— italic_k
matrix. In addition to the unique challenges conveyed by
ПҖ
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
рқңӢ
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\pi\in\mathcal{P}_{k}
italic_ПҖ вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, it is common in practical situations that rankings are incomplete. An incomplete ranking observation is one that does not elicit the ordering of all elements of the item set and will be denoted by
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
. For instance, in top
вҲ’
l
рқ‘ҷ
-l
- italic_l
elicitation, judges are asked to provide their first
l
<
k
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘ҳ
l<k
italic_l < italic_k
choices. This is a common approach for dealing with moderate to large item sets, frequently applied within educational (university rankings) and political (voting) settings. Another possibility is that
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
is generated from pairwise choices. In this case, preferences among pairs
{
i
,
j
}
,
i
вү 
j
,
i
,
j
вҲҲ
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
}
formulae-sequence
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
\{i,j\},i\neq j,i,j\in\{1,\ldots,k\}
{ italic_i , italic_j } , italic_i вү  italic_j , italic_i , italic_j вҲҲ { 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k }
are collected for different
i
,
j
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
i,j
italic_i , italic_j
combinations. Most often, not all combinations necessary to produce a complete ranking are elicited. For example, consider
k
=
3
рқ‘ҳ
3
k=3
italic_k = 3
and the set of decisions
рқ’һ
=
{
1
вү»
2
,
1
вү»
3
}
рқ’һ
formulae-sequence
succeeds
1
2
succeeds
1
3
\mathcal{C}=\{1\succ 2,1\succ 3\}
caligraphic_C = { 1 вү» 2 , 1 вү» 3 }
where
i
вү»
j
succeeds
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
i\succ j
italic_i вү» italic_j
indicates strict preference of
i
рқ‘–
i
italic_i
over
j
рқ‘—
j
italic_j
. The observation of
рқ’һ
рқ’һ
\mathcal{C}
caligraphic_C
generates an incomplete ranking as it is compatible with
ПҖ
=
(
1
,
2
,
3
)
рқңӢ
1
2
3
\pi=(1,2,3)
italic_ПҖ = ( 1 , 2 , 3 )
and
ПҖ
=
(
1
,
3
,
2
)
рқңӢ
1
3
2
\pi=(1,3,2)
italic_ПҖ = ( 1 , 3 , 2 )
.
Statistical treatment of
ПҖ
рқңӢ
\pi
italic_ПҖ
or
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
aims to describe the rankings-generating mechanism via probabilistic models. This can take several directions that vary on their underlying assumptions. Some possibilities are the
Thurstone, multistage
and
distance-based models
. Under
Thurstone
(or order-statistic)
models
, it is assumed that there exist latent scores associated with items and a ranking is generated from their ordering. The Plackett-Luce
(
Plackett
,
1975
)
model is the most famous within
multistage models
, a class pinned by the independence of irrelative alternatives assumption (IIA). IIA states that the relative preference between two alternatives should not be affected by the introduction or removal of other alternatives. For instance, if a judge prefers option 1 over 2, they should continue to do so regardless of the presence of a third. Finally,
distance-based models
assume the existence of a
consensus ranking
, say
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, and attribute probability mass according to the rankingвҖҷs distances to
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. The Mallows model
(
Mallows
,
1957
)
and its generalisations
(
Fligner and Verducci
,
1986
)
are prominent approaches in this class, highly regarded for their interpretability and parsimony. For a more detailed description of probability models for rankings, we recommend
Marden
(
1995
)
.
Our contribution is situated within
distance based
models, a class that has seen many recent developments. A significant focus in this area has been on
rank aggregation
. For instance, the works by
Irurozki et al.
(
2018
)
and
Crispino et al.
(
2023
)
explore consensus estimation using the Mallows model with alternative distances. In
Meila and Bao
(
2010
)
and
Crispino et al.
(
2017
)
, ranking aggregation from top-
l
рқ‘ҷ
l
italic_l
rankings and pairwise preferences with inconsistencies are addressed, respectively. Extensions of the Mallows model have also been employed to tackle quality and stability in rankings
(
Li et al.
,
2019
)
and to handle rank aggregation from non-homogeneous populations
(
Vitelli et al.
,
2018
)
. While the rank aggregation task is well-studied, the literature on dynamic rankings is still scarce.
In practice, rankings that evolve over time arise naturally in numerous real-world contexts, reflecting the dynamic nature of preferences. For instance, in sports, studying the evolution of teams or playersвҖҷ rankings can offer insights into performance trends and competitive balance. In marketing and consumer trends, tracking changes in customer preferences through product rankings over time can guide marketing strategies and inventory planning. Other real-world examples of ranking time series are the dynamical ranking of web pages within search engines, the yearly rankings of academic institutions, and candidate rankings from sequential election polls.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only two approaches to handle time-varying rankings with stochastic dynamics. The first work in this area is due to
Asfaw et al.
(
2017
)
, where a time-varying ranking model based on the Mallows model is proposed under the Bayesian framework. Their model assumes conditional independence among the rankings and the temporal dynamics are driven by a further Mallows model for the consensus ranking (Markovian structure) and a Gaussian random walk for the scale parameter. A second approach was recently introduced by
HolГҪ and Zouhar
(
2022
)
, where the model is constructed based on the Plackett-Luce distribution with time-varying parameters following a Generalised AutoRegressive Score
(
Creal et al.
,
2013
)
structure.
The chief goal of this paper is to introduce and explore a novel methodology for time series of rankings inspired by the Generalised AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) models
(
Engle
,
1982
;
Bollerslev
,
1986
)
. Our modelling is built upon the Mallows model, which implicitly depends on distance. More specifically, we propose a reparameterisation of the Mallows distribution in terms of the mean parameter. Then, the temporal dynamic is defined by the conditional distribution of the current ranking given the past rankings, which is assumed to follow a reparameterised Mallows distribution, where autoregressive and feedback components are incorporated into the model through the conditional expectation of the associated distances. Our approach results in a GARCH-type dynamic for the sequence of distances. We call this novel class of time series by Ranking-GARCH (in short R-GARCH) models.
This formulation allows us to establish desirable stochastic properties for our model such as stationarity and ergodicity, and offers an intuitive dynamic in terms of the distances. In particular, the sample autocorrelation function (ACF) and partial ACF of the distances provide useful information on the lags to be considered in the modelling. Moreover, the ACF can be derived from the well-established results from ARMA processes since the distance process admits an ARMA representation. Another important contribution of this paper is the development of a Monte Carlo EM algorithm to deal with incomplete rankings.
The paper unfolds as follows. In Section
2
, we introduce some needed notation, define our class of Ranking GARCH models, and derive some statistical properties. Section
3
is devoted to model inference when the data is fully observed, while Section
4
handles inference when missing data occurs. Simulated results are also presented to explore the finite-sample performance of the proposed estimators under both non-missing and missing data scenarios. We apply the proposed R-GARCH models to analyse the weekly ranking of professional tennis players from 2015 to 2019 in Section
5
. Concluding remarks are discussed in Section
6
.
2
Ranking GARCH Models
In this section, our proposed class of ranking time series models is defined and illustrated. As introduced previously, a complete ordering of an item set
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
}
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
\{1,\ldots,k\}
{ 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k }
is a point in
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, the space of permutations of
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
labels. Observations in
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are denoted by
ПҖ
=
(
ПҖ
вҒў
(
1
)
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
вҒў
(
k
)
)
рқңӢ
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҳ
\pi=(\pi(1),\ldots,\pi(k))
italic_ПҖ = ( italic_ПҖ ( 1 ) , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ ( italic_k ) )
, where
ПҖ
вҒў
(
i
)
рқңӢ
рқ‘–
\pi(i)
italic_ПҖ ( italic_i )
is the rank given to item
i
рқ‘–
i
italic_i
, for
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
рқ‘–
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
i=1,\ldots,k
italic_i = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k
. The inverse operation,
ПҖ
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
i
)
superscript
рқңӢ
1
рқ‘–
\pi^{-1}(i)
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_i )
is also well defined and returns the rank of item
i
рқ‘–
i
italic_i
.
Construction of the R-GARCH approach will be based on the model by
Mallows
(
1957
)
, which is defined via the probability function
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
|
Оё
)
=
exp
вҒЎ
{
вҲ’
Оё
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
}
/
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
,
ПҖ
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
,
Оё
вҲҲ
в„қ
,
formulae-sequence
рқ‘қ
conditional
рқңӢ
рқңғ
рқңғ
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқң“
рқңғ
formulae-sequence
рқңӢ
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
в„қ
\displaystyle p(\pi|\theta)=\exp\{-\theta d(\pi,\pi_{0})\}/\psi(\theta),\quad%
\pi\in\mathcal{P}_{k},\quad\theta\in\mathbb{R},
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ | italic_Оё ) = roman_exp { - italic_Оё italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) } / italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё ) , italic_ПҖ вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Оё вҲҲ blackboard_R ,
(1)
where
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is a fixed ranking known as the
population consensus
, and
Оё
рқңғ
\theta
italic_Оё
is a concentration parameter. For
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\pi,\pi_{0}\in\mathcal{P}_{k}
italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
,
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
is a distance on
рқ’«
k
Г—
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}\times\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT Г— caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, so
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
вүҘ
0
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
0
d(\pi,\pi_{0})\geq 0
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) вүҘ 0
with equality holding if and only if
ПҖ
=
ПҖ
0
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi=\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ = italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. For
Оё
>
0
рқңғ
0
\theta>0
italic_Оё > 0
,
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is the modal ranking. The limit cases
Оё
вҶ’
0
+
вҶ’
рқңғ
superscript
0
\theta\rightarrow 0^{+}
italic_Оё вҶ’ 0 start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT + end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
and
Оё
вҶ’
вҲһ
вҶ’
рқңғ
\theta\rightarrow\infty
italic_Оё вҶ’ вҲһ
give us the uniform distribution (on
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
) and the degenerate distribution at
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, respectively. When
Оё
<
0
рқңғ
0
\theta<0
italic_Оё < 0
,
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is an antimode. We only consider the case
Оё
>
0
рқңғ
0
\theta>0
italic_Оё > 0
in this paper, which also ensures model identifiability. Also, we focus on distances that are right-invariant
(
Critchlow
,
1985
)
as often done in the literature. Mathematically,
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
is right-invariant if it satisfies
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
=
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
вҲҳ
П„
,
ПҖ
0
вҲҳ
П„
)
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
рқңҸ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқңҸ
d(\pi,\pi_{0})=d(\pi\circ\tau,\pi_{0}\circ\tau)
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_d ( italic_ПҖ вҲҳ italic_П„ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲҳ italic_П„ )
,
вҲҖ
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
,
П„
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
for-all
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқңҸ
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\forall\pi,\pi_{0},\tau\in\mathcal{P}_{k}
вҲҖ italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_П„ вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, where
ПҖ
вҲҳ
П„
рқңӢ
рқңҸ
\pi\circ\tau
italic_ПҖ вҲҳ italic_П„
denotes the composition of permutations
ПҖ
рқңӢ
\pi
italic_ПҖ
and
П„
рқңҸ
\tau
italic_П„
in the same space. In other words, under right-invariance, the distance is not affected by item-relabelling. A ranking
ПҖ
рқңӢ
\pi
italic_ПҖ
following the Mallows model (
1
) is denoted by
ПҖ
вҲј
Mallows
вҒў
(
ПҖ
0
,
Оё
)
similar-to
рқңӢ
Mallows
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқңғ
\pi\sim\mbox{Mallows}(\pi_{0},\theta)
italic_ПҖ вҲј Mallows ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Оё )
, which implicitly depends on the distance
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
.
The choice of distance is a crucial point concerning Mallows model tractability. This is because the availability of an analytical form for the modelвҖҷs normalisation constant given by
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
=
вҲ‘
ПҖ
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
exp
вҒЎ
{
вҲ’
Оё
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
}
рқң“
рқңғ
subscript
рқңӢ
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\psi(\theta)=\sum_{\pi\in\mathcal{P}_{k}}\exp\{-\theta d(\pi,\pi_{0})\}
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё ) = вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_ПҖ вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUBSCRIPT roman_exp { - italic_Оё italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) }
depends on
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
. The majority of applications of the Mallows model focus on the Kendall and Hamming distances because closed-form solutions for
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
have been derived in the seminal work by
Fligner and Verducci
(
1986
)
. More recently in
Irurozki et al.
(
2018
)
, this has been achieved for the Cayley distance based on a result provided by
Fligner and Verducci
(
1986
)
. However, the derivation of these closed-form expressions is non-trivial. For instance, the Spearman and Footrule distances are often of interest but are choices that make (
1
) an intractable likelihood (except for trivially small
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
). In this situation, the model inference is challenging and requires the use of
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
approximations or specialised methods.
We now consider the Mallows model given in Equation (
1
) reparameterised in terms of the mean
Ој
=
E
вҒў
(
ПҖ
)
вүЎ
g
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқңҮ
рқҗё
рқңӢ
рқ‘”
рқңғ
\mu=E(\pi)\equiv g(\theta)
italic_Ој = italic_E ( italic_ПҖ ) вүЎ italic_g ( italic_Оё )
, which will be the basis for our time series construction. We denote this reparameterised version as
ПҖ
вҲј
Mallows
вҒў
(
Ој
,
ПҖ
0
)
similar-to
рқңӢ
Mallows
рқңҮ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi\sim\mbox{Mallows}(\mu,\pi_{0})
italic_ПҖ вҲј Mallows ( italic_Ој , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
. Let
{
ПҖ
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\pi_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
be a sequence of random rankings on
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, with
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
denoting a ranking of the item set at time
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
. To specify a GARCH-type probability model for
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
at time
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
, we let
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
to be the population consensus, and consider a reparametrisation of (
1
) in terms of the distance mean
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
conditional on the past rankings, which induces a dynamics for the spread parameter, now depending on
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
, say
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. Evidently,
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is a function of the previous rank
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and the unknown spread parameter
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. We denote this as
Ој
t
=
g
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
Оё
t
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘”
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}=g(\pi_{t-1},\theta_{t})
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, or simply
Ој
t
=
g
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘”
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}=g(\theta_{t})
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
for right-invariant distances. Naturally, the form of
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
is dictated by the type of distance, which we approach next. With these ingredients, a formal definition of our ranking time series models inspired by the GARCH processes is presented below.
Definition 2.1
(R-GARCH models)
.
Let
{
ПҖ
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\pi_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
be a time series of rankings and
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
be the sigma-algebra generated by
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
вҒў
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
вҖҰ
\pi_{t-1},\pi_{t-2}\ldots
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҖҰ
, for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
. We say that
{
ПҖ
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\pi_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is a Ranking-GARCH process if satisfies
ПҖ
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
conditional
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\displaystyle\pi_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
вҲј
similar-to
\displaystyle\sim
вҲј
Mallows
вҒў
(
Ој
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
,
Mallows
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\displaystyle\mbox{Mallows}(\mu_{t},\pi_{t-1}),
Mallows ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ,
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
вүЎ
\displaystyle\equiv
вүЎ
E
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
вҲ’
1
)
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
Ој
t
вҲ’
j
,
рқҗё
conditional
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
\displaystyle E\left(d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})|\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)=\phi_{0}+{%
\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}d(\pi_{t-i},\pi_{t-i-1})}+\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}\mu_{t%
-j},
italic_E ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ,
(2)
for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
, with
p
,
q
вҲҲ
в„•
0
вүЎ
{
0
,
1
,
2
,
вҖҰ
}
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
в„•
0
0
1
2
вҖҰ
p,q\in\mathbb{N}_{0}\equiv\{0,1,2,\ldots\}
italic_p , italic_q вҲҲ blackboard_N start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ { 0 , 1 , 2 , вҖҰ }
, where
П•
0
>
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
0
\phi_{0}>0
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT > 0
is an intercept,
П•
1
,
вҖҰ
,
П•
p
вүҘ
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
вҖҰ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘қ
0
\phi_{1},\ldots,\phi_{p}\geq 0
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүҘ 0
are autoregressive parameters, and
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
q
вүҘ
0
subscript
рқӣј
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘һ
0
\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{q}\geq 0
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүҘ 0
are parameters related to effect of past conditional distance means. We denote
{
ПҖ
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
вҲј
R-GARCH(p,q)
similar-to
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
R-GARCH(p,q)
\{\pi_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}\sim\mbox{R-GARCH(p,q)}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲј R-GARCH(p,q)
.
For a Ranking-GARCH process
{
ПҖ
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\pi_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
,
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is the conditional mean function of the distance
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
given
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, which is time-varying and depends on the parameter vector
рқң·
=
(
П•
0
,
П•
вҠӨ
,
рқң¶
вҠӨ
)
вҠӨ
рқң·
superscript
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
bold-italic-П•
top
superscript
рқң¶
top
top
\boldsymbol{\beta}=(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi}^{\top},\boldsymbol{\alpha}^{%
\top})^{\top}
bold_italic_ОІ = ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_Оұ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
, where
П•
вүЎ
(
П•
1
,
вҖҰ
,
П•
p
)
вҠӨ
bold-italic-П•
superscript
subscript
italic-П•
1
вҖҰ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘қ
top
\boldsymbol{\phi}\equiv(\phi_{1},\ldots,\phi_{p})^{\top}
bold_italic_П• вүЎ ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
and
рқң¶
вүЎ
(
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
q
)
вҠӨ
рқң¶
superscript
subscript
рқӣј
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘һ
top
\boldsymbol{\alpha}\equiv(\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{q})^{\top}
bold_italic_Оұ вүЎ ( italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
. The conditional probability of
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
given
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, say
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
p(\pi_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
assumes the form (
1
), which implicitly depends on
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
, and with
Оё
t
=
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}=g^{-1}(\mu_{t})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
instead of
Оё
рқңғ
\theta
italic_Оё
.
To explicitly compute the conditional probability function involved in Definition
2.1
in terms of
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, it is necessary to compute
Оё
t
=
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}=g^{-1}(\mu_{t})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
. Therefore, having a closed-form expression for the expected value of the distance plays is crucial for this task. For the R-GARCH model with Kendall distance, such a function
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
is known and given in Eq. (
3
) from Remark
2.1
. Although our simulation experiments will focus on this specification, the R-GARCH model is tractable for any
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
where
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
and
g
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқ‘”
рқңғ
g(\theta)
italic_g ( italic_Оё )
are available. In Remark
2.2
, we present explicit quantities under the Hamming distance (mean given in Eq. (
4
)), which will also be considered in our data application.
Remark 2.1
.
For the numerical experiments in this paper, we will consider the Kendall distance. In this case, closed forms for moments of
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
and the normalisation constant
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
can be explicitly found in the literature. More specifically, for
ПҖ
вҲј
Mallows
вҒў
(
ПҖ
0
,
Оё
)
similar-to
рқңӢ
Mallows
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқңғ
\pi\sim\mbox{Mallows}(\pi_{0},\theta)
italic_ПҖ вҲј Mallows ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Оё )
(classic parameterisation) with the Kendall distance, the expected value and variance of
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
d(\pi,\pi_{0})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
are given respectively by
Ој
вүЎ
g
вҒў
(
Оё
)
вүЎ
E
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
)
=
k
вҒў
e
вҲ’
Оё
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
Оё
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
k
j
вҒў
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
рқңҮ
рқ‘”
рқңғ
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘ҳ
рқ‘—
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
рқңғ
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
рқңғ
\displaystyle\mu\equiv g(\theta)\equiv E(d(\pi,\pi_{0}))=\frac{ke^{-\theta}}{1%
-e^{-\theta}}-\sum_{j=1}^{k}\frac{je^{-j\theta}}{1-e^{-j\theta}}
italic_Ој вүЎ italic_g ( italic_Оё ) вүЎ italic_E ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) = divide start_ARG italic_k italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_j italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG
(3)
and
Var
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
)
=
k
вҒў
e
вҲ’
Оё
(
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
Оё
)
2
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
k
j
2
вҒў
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
(
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
)
2
,
Var
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
superscript
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
2
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘—
2
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
рқңғ
superscript
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
рқңғ
2
\mbox{Var}(d(\pi,\pi_{0}))=\frac{ke^{-\theta}}{(1-e^{-\theta})^{2}}-\sum_{j=1}%
^{k}\frac{j^{2}e^{-j\theta}}{(1-e^{-j\theta})^{2}},
Var ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) = divide start_ARG italic_k italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG ( 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_j start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG ( 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG ,
for any modal ranking
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
; for instance, see
Fligner and Verducci
(
1986
)
. Also, the modelвҖҷs normalisation constant has the analytical form:
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
=
вҲҸ
l
=
2
k
(
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
Оё
вҒў
l
)
(
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
Оё
)
k
вҲ’
1
,
рқң“
рқңғ
superscript
subscript
product
рқ‘ҷ
2
рқ‘ҳ
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
рқ‘ҷ
superscript
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
рқ‘ҳ
1
\psi(\theta)=\frac{\prod_{l=2}^{k}(1-e^{-\theta l})}{(1-e^{-\theta})^{k-1}},
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё ) = divide start_ARG вҲҸ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l = 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё italic_l end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG ( 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG ,
which does not depend on
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
due to right-invariance of
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
.
Remark 2.2
.
For
ПҖ
вҲј
Mallows
вҒў
(
ПҖ
0
,
Оё
)
similar-to
рқңӢ
Mallows
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқңғ
\pi\sim\mbox{Mallows}(\pi_{0},\theta)
italic_ПҖ вҲј Mallows ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Оё )
with the Hamming distance and by using the results on moment generating function provided by
Fligner and Verducci
(
1986
)
, we obtain that the expected value and variance of
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
d(\pi,\pi_{0})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
are given respectively by
Ој
вүЎ
g
вҒў
(
Оё
)
вүЎ
E
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
)
=
k
вҲ’
e
Оё
вҒў
A
вҒў
(
k
вҲ’
1
,
Оё
)
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
рқңҮ
рқ‘”
рқңғ
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
1
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
\displaystyle\mu\equiv g(\theta)\equiv E(d(\pi,\pi_{0}))=k-e^{\theta}\dfrac{A(%
k-1,\theta)}{A(k,\theta)}
italic_Ој вүЎ italic_g ( italic_Оё ) вүЎ italic_E ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) = italic_k - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k - 1 , italic_Оё ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё ) end_ARG
(4)
and
Var
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
,
ПҖ
0
)
)
=
e
Оё
вҒў
A
вҒў
(
k
вҲ’
1
,
Оё
)
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
+
e
2
вҒў
Оё
вҒў
{
A
вҒў
(
k
вҲ’
2
,
Оё
)
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
+
(
A
вҒў
(
k
вҲ’
1
,
Оё
)
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
)
2
}
,
Var
рқ‘‘
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
0
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
1
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
superscript
рқ‘’
2
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
2
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
superscript
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
1
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
2
\mbox{Var}(d(\pi,\pi_{0}))=e^{\theta}\dfrac{A(k-1,\theta)}{A(k,\theta)}+e^{2%
\theta}\left\{\dfrac{A(k-2,\theta)}{A(k,\theta)}+\left(\dfrac{A(k-1,\theta)}{A%
(k,\theta)}\right)^{2}\right\},
Var ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) = italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k - 1 , italic_Оё ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё ) end_ARG + italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT { divide start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k - 2 , italic_Оё ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё ) end_ARG + ( divide start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k - 1 , italic_Оё ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё ) end_ARG ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT } ,
for any modal ranking
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, where we have defined
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
вүЎ
вҲ‘
j
=
0
k
(
e
Оё
вҲ’
1
)
j
j
!
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
0
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
superscript
рқ‘’
рқңғ
1
рқ‘—
рқ‘—
A(k,\theta)\equiv\displaystyle\sum_{j=0}^{k}\frac{(e^{\theta}-1)^{j}}{j!}
italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё ) вүЎ вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG ( italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG italic_j ! end_ARG
. The analytical form of
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
in this case is
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
=
k
!
вҒў
e
вҲ’
k
вҒў
Оё
вҒў
A
вҒў
(
k
,
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
рқҗҙ
рқ‘ҳ
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)=k!e^{-k\theta}A(k,\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё ) = italic_k ! italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_k italic_Оё end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_A ( italic_k , italic_Оё )
for any
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
due to right-invariance of the Hamming
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
, with
A
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқҗҙ
вӢ…
вӢ…
A(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_A ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
as defined above.
With the given results in Remark
2.1
or Remark
2.2
, inverting the function
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
requires finding the solution of
Ој
t
=
g
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘”
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}=g(\theta_{t})
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
with respect to
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. As this depends on the GARCH parameters, we adopt the notation
Оё
t
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
\theta_{t}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ )
.
Finding
Оё
t
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
\theta_{t}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ )
can be done as described in Algorithm
1
or with any other root-finding routines. Our pseudo-code provides a solution that defines a target function, which returns the squared difference between
g
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
рқ‘”
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
g(\theta_{t})
italic_g ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
and
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. The latter is then minimised with respect to
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
which can easily be accomplished with the
optim
routine in
R
. The algorithm is adapted to distances other than the Kendall by changing line 4 from Algorithm
1
to the appropriate
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
form.
1
Input:
рққ…
ВҜ
bold-ВҜ
рққ…
\boldsymbol{\underline{\pi}}
underbold_ВҜ start_ARG bold_italic_ПҖ end_ARG
,
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
,
П•
bold-italic-П•
\boldsymbol{\phi}
bold_italic_П•
,
рқң¶
рқң¶
\boldsymbol{\alpha}
bold_italic_Оұ
2
3
for
t
вҲҲ
(
max
вҒЎ
{
p
,
q
}
+
1
)
:
n
:
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
рқ‘ӣ
t\in(\max\{p,q\}+1):n
italic_t вҲҲ ( roman_max { italic_p , italic_q } + 1 ) : italic_n
do
4
5
Compute
Ој
t
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
j
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
вҲ’
1
)
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
Ој
t
вҲ’
j
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘—
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
\mu_{t}=\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{j}d(\pi_{t-i},\pi_{t-i-1})+\sum_{j=1}^{q}%
\alpha_{j}\mu_{t-j}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
6
Target
(
Оё
t
,
Ој
t
,
k
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҳ
\theta_{t},\mu_{t},k
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_k
):
// Define
Target
function
7
E
=
k
вҒў
e
вҲ’
Оё
t
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
Оё
t
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
k
j
вҒў
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
t
1
вҲ’
e
вҲ’
j
вҒў
Оё
t
рқҗё
рқ‘ҳ
superscript
рқ‘’
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқ‘’
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘ҳ
рқ‘—
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқ‘’
рқ‘—
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
E=\frac{ke^{-\theta_{t}}}{1-e^{-\theta_{t}}}-\sum_{j=1}^{k}\frac{je^{-j\theta_%
{t}}}{1-e^{-j\theta_{t}}}
italic_E = divide start_ARG italic_k italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_j italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - italic_e start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - italic_j italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG
;
8
return
(
E
вҲ’
Ој
t
)
2
superscript
рқҗё
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
2
(E-\mu_{t})^{2}
( italic_E - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
9
10
Оё
t
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
вҶҗ
вҶҗ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
absent
\theta_{t}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha})\leftarrow
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ ) вҶҗ
Minimize
Target(
Оё
t
,
Ој
t
,
k
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҳ
\theta_{t},\mu_{t},k
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_k
)
with respect to
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
for the given
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
;
11
end for
12
Output:
Оё
max
вҒЎ
{
p
,
q
}
+
1
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
,
вҖҰ
,
Оё
n
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
{\theta}_{\max\{p,q\}+1}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha}),%
\ldots,\theta_{n}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT roman_max { italic_p , italic_q } + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ ) , вҖҰ , italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ )
13
AlgorithmВ 1
Algorithm to compute
Оё
t
вҒў
(
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
\theta_{t}(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ )
for all
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
under the Kendall distance.
We conclude this subsection by giving some remarks on the R-GARCH model for clarity of exposure.
Remark 2.3
.
(i)
At time
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
, the ranking (
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
) has its temporal dependence driven by Equation (
2.1
), which states a GARCH-type structure for the sequence of distances
d
t
вүЎ
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d_{t}\equiv d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
. The conditional expectation of
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
given
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
(
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
) depends on the previous distances
d
t
вҲ’
1
вҒў
вҖҰ
,
d
t
вҲ’
p
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘қ
d_{t-1}\ldots,d_{t-p}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҖҰ , italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_p end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, which plays the rule of autoregressive (AR) components with respective AR coefficients
П•
1
,
вҖҰ
,
П•
p
subscript
italic-П•
1
вҖҰ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘қ
\phi_{1},\ldots,\phi_{p}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. The feedbacks
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Ој
t
вҲ’
q
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘һ
\mu_{t-1},\ldots,\mu_{t-q}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_q end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are also included to explain
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
with respective coefficients
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
q
subscript
рқӣј
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘һ
\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{q}
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. At this point, it is important to highlight that we are modelling the conditional mean of
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
given
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mathcal{F}_{t-1}
caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
rather than the conditional variance considered in the well-established GARCH models. Note that the conditional variance is also modelled under our methodology since it depends on
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
; therefore, R-GARCH models have joint conditional mean/variance dynamics. Our approach resembles the integer-valued GARCH models (for instance, see
Ferland et al.
(
2006
)
), which are designed to handle count time series data and consider a time-varying conditional mean.
(ii)
For
p
=
q
=
0
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
0
p=q=0
italic_p = italic_q = 0
, the spread parameter is a constant function of
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. In this situation, there is no temporal dependence to be modelled and one should consider the classic Mallows model (assuming independence among the rankings) with mode
ПҖ
0
subscript
рқңӢ
0
\pi_{0}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and parameter
Оё
=
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
П•
0
)
рқңғ
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
\theta=g^{-1}(\phi_{0})
italic_Оё = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
.
(iii)
Although the R-GARCH model is presented in detail for Kendall and Hamming cases, its formulation for other distances
d
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘‘
вӢ…
вӢ…
d(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_d ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
follows straightforwardly if the functions
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
and
ПҲ
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқң“
вӢ…
\psi(\cdot)
italic_ПҲ ( вӢ… )
(mean and normalisation constant) are available in closed form. Naturally, working with distances under which
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
рқң“
рқңғ
\psi(\theta)
italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё )
and distribution moments are not analytical presents additional challenges. However this is not exclusive to the R-GARCH models, but common to any Mallows-type model involving them.
2.1
Data Generation
Simulated trajectories of the proposed model are explored in this section, which focuses on investigating the effects of the R-GARCH parameters. To this end, we can avail of data generation routines implemented for the Mallows model in the
R
package
BayesMallows
(
SГёrensen et al.
,
2020
)
. Our starting scenario considers the ranking of
k
=
10
рқ‘ҳ
10
k=10
italic_k = 10
objects over
n
=
1000
рқ‘ӣ
1000
n=1000
italic_n = 1000
time points (sample size). We consider
p
=
1
рқ‘қ
1
p=1
italic_p = 1
with
П•
1
=
0.3
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.3
\phi_{1}=0.3
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
and
q
=
0
рқ‘һ
0
q=0
italic_q = 0
. Different values of
П•
0
=
(
3
,
5
,
7
)
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
5
7
\phi_{0}=(3,5,7)
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = ( 3 , 5 , 7 )
are included initially so the conditional mean structure becomes
Ој
t
=
П•
0
+
П•
1
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
\mu_{t}=\phi_{0}+\phi_{1}d(\pi_{t-1},\pi_{t-2})
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
.
Three trajectories are simulated using the different
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
values and are illustrated next. In Figure
1
, the conditional mean process over time is illustrated on the right, with different colors indicating the
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
used for simulation. Naturally, higher values of
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
produce higher conditional means, which indicates that larger deviations from
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
to
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are supported.
On the left-side panel of Figure
1
, histograms show the empirical distribution of the lag-one distances, i.e.
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
d(\pi_{t-1},\pi_{t-2})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
for all
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
, obtained in each configuration. The histograms evidence how higher distance values are supported when increasing
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, while small intercepts encourage small lag-one deviations.
Figure 1:
Conditional mean trajectories of three simulated ranking time series with
k
=
10
рқ‘ҳ
10
k=10
italic_k = 10
items and length
n
=
1000
рқ‘ӣ
1000
n=1000
italic_n = 1000
. Highest values of the intercept
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
model larger values of
Ој
t
=
E
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
conditional
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mu_{t}=E\left(d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})|\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_E ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, for
t
=
2
,
вҖҰ
,
1000
рқ‘Ў
2
вҖҰ
1000
t=2,\ldots,1000
italic_t = 2 , вҖҰ , 1000
. This is further illustrated with the histograms on the right, which show the frequency of
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
observed under the trajectories obtained with
П•
0
=
3
,
5
,
7
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
5
7
\phi_{0}=3,5,7
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3 , 5 , 7
.
An alternative visualisation of the same simulated data is provided in Figure
2
. To produce this figure, rankings are converted to orderings so
рққ…
ВҜ
вҲ’
1
вүЎ
(
ПҖ
1
вҲ’
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
k
вҲ’
1
)
superscript
bold-ВҜ
рққ…
1
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
1
1
вҖҰ
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
1
рқ‘ҳ
\boldsymbol{\underline{\pi}}^{-1}\equiv(\pi^{-1}_{1},\ldots,\pi^{-1}_{k})
underbold_ВҜ start_ARG bold_italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вүЎ ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
is obtained. This allows us to explore the trajectory of rank assignments given to a fixed object over time. Figure
2
provides a visualisation of
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
i
)
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
1
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
\pi^{-1}_{t}(i)
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_i )
versus
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
for all items
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
10
рқ‘–
1
вҖҰ
10
i=1,\ldots,10
italic_i = 1 , вҖҰ , 10
, with
i
рқ‘–
i
italic_i
indicated in each row. Repeating this exercise for the three simulated datasets results in the columns of Figure
2
, which vary in
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
value. The alternative visualisation of the ranking time series provided in this figure highlights how smaller
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
encourage less variation in the rankings received by each item over time.
Figure 2:
Time series of orderings given to items
i
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
10
рқ‘–
1
вҖҰ
10
i=1,\ldots,10
italic_i = 1 , вҖҰ , 10
(rows) in the trajectories simulated with
k
=
10
,
n
=
1000
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
10
рқ‘ӣ
1000
k=10,n=1000
italic_k = 10 , italic_n = 1000
,
П•
1
=
0.3
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.3
\phi_{1}=0.3
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
and
П•
0
=
1
,
3
,
5
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
3
5
\phi_{0}=1,3,5
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 1 , 3 , 5
.
Now that the role of
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
in R-GARCH models is well understood, further settings aim at exploring the parameters that control the time dynamics. We continue studying the ten-item setting and compare R-GARCH models that employ
p
=
1
,
q
=
0
formulae-sequence
рқ‘қ
1
рқ‘һ
0
p=1,q=0
italic_p = 1 , italic_q = 0
and
p
=
1
,
q
=
1
formulae-sequence
рқ‘қ
1
рқ‘һ
1
p=1,q=1
italic_p = 1 , italic_q = 1
. The conditional conditional expectation structure is now
Ој
t
=
П•
0
+
П•
1
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
)
+
Оұ
1
вҒў
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
subscript
рқӣј
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mu_{t}=\phi_{0}+\phi_{1}d(\pi_{t-1},\pi_{t-2})+\alpha_{1}\mu_{t-1}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and parameter values are
П•
0
=
3
,
П•
1
=
0.3
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.3
\phi_{0}=3,\phi_{1}=0.3
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
and
Оұ
1
=
0
subscript
рқӣј
1
0
\alpha_{1}=0
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0
or
Оұ
1
=
0.3
subscript
рқӣј
1
0.3
\alpha_{1}=0.3
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
. In this study, one thousand trajectories are generated from each R-GARCH(1,0) (
p
=
1
,
q
=
0
formulae-sequence
рқ‘қ
1
рқ‘һ
0
p=1,q=0
italic_p = 1 , italic_q = 0
) and R-GARCH(1,1) (
p
=
1
,
q
=
1
formulae-sequence
рқ‘қ
1
рқ‘һ
1
p=1,q=1
italic_p = 1 , italic_q = 1
) configurations.
The empirical autocorrelation of lags one to ten of the conditional mean process
{
Ој
t
}
t
=
2
n
superscript
subscript
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
2
рқ‘ӣ
\{\mu_{t}\}_{t=2}^{n}
{ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
is computed and stored for each trajectory. Figure
3
illustrates the results with boxplots, with lags indicated in the horizontal axis and configurations represented with different colors. With the addition of the moving average term, the ACF is increased when compared to the case
q
=
0
рқ‘һ
0
q=0
italic_q = 0
as expected. By looking at Figure
3
, the behaviour of the ACFs resembles that of ARMA models with exponential decay. In the next subsection, we show that the sequence of distances admits an ARMA representation, which theoretically justifies this statement.
Figure 3:
Boxplots of empirical autocorrelation of lags one to ten from one hundred R-GARCH(1,0) and R-GARCH(1,1) simulated trajectories.
2.2
Stationarity and Ergodicity
In this subsection, we establish stationarity and ergodicity properties for the sequence of distances
d
t
вүЎ
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d_{t}\equiv d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
.
Theorem 2.4
.
The sequence of distances
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is first-order stationary if
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}+\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
.
Proof.
By computing the expectation in both sides of Equation (
2.1
) and by using the notation
d
t
вүЎ
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d_{t}\equiv d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, we have that
E
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҒў
E
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
i
)
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
E
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
j
)
,
рқҗё
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
\displaystyle E(\mu_{t})=E(d_{t})=\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}E(d_{t-i})+%
\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}E(d_{t-j}),
italic_E ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ,
(5)
where we have used the fact that
E
вҒў
(
Ој
t
вҲ’
j
)
=
E
вҒў
[
E
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
j
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
j
вҲ’
1
)
]
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
j
)
рқҗё
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
рқҗё
delimited-[]
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
1
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
E(\mu_{t-j})=E[E(d_{t-j}|\mathcal{F}_{t-j-1})]=E(d_{t-j})
italic_E ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_E [ italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ] = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
for
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
q
рқ‘—
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘һ
j=1,\ldots,q
italic_j = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_q
. Denote
О»
t
вүЎ
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
subscript
рқңҶ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
\lambda_{t}\equiv E(d_{t})
italic_О» start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
. Then, the above equation can be expressed as
О»
t
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
вҒў
О»
t
вҲ’
i
,
subscript
рқңҶ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
subscript
рқңҶ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
\lambda_{t}=\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})\lambda_{t-i},
italic_О» start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_О» start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ,
where
П•
i
вүЎ
0
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
0
\phi_{i}\equiv 0
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ 0
for
i
>
p
рқ‘–
рқ‘қ
i>p
italic_i > italic_p
and
Оұ
j
вүЎ
0
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
0
\alpha_{j}\equiv 0
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ 0
for
j
>
q
рқ‘—
рқ‘һ
j>q
italic_j > italic_q
. In terms of the backshift operator
B
рқҗө
B
italic_B
, it follows that
(
1
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
вҒў
B
i
)
вҒў
О»
t
=
П•
0
,
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
superscript
рқҗө
рқ‘–
subscript
рқңҶ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
0
\left(1-\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})B^{i}\right)\lambda_{t}=%
\phi_{0},
( 1 - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_B start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) italic_О» start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ,
which is a homogeneous difference equation. It has a stable and finite solution that does not depend on
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
if
1
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
вҒў
z
i
вү 
0
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
superscript
рқ‘§
рқ‘–
0
1-\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})z^{i}\neq 0
1 - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_z start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вү  0
вҲҖ
|
z
|
вүӨ
1
for-all
рқ‘§
1
\,\,\forall|z|\leq 1
вҲҖ | italic_z | вүӨ 1
. Since
П•
1
,
вҖҰ
,
П•
p
subscript
italic-П•
1
вҖҰ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘қ
\phi_{1},\ldots,\phi_{p}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and
Оұ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Оұ
q
subscript
рқӣј
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘һ
\alpha_{1},\ldots,\alpha_{q}
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are non-negative, this condition is equivalent to
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) < 1
.
вҲҺ
Corollary 2.5
.
Under the first-order stationarity of
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, we have that
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
=
E
вҒў
(
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
)
=
П•
0
1
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
.
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
E(d_{t})=E(d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1}))=\dfrac{\phi_{0}}{1-\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p%
}\phi_{i}-\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}}.
italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_E ( italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) = divide start_ARG italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG .
Proof.
The result is immediately obtained by using Equation (
5
) and the fact that
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
s
)
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ 
E(d_{t})=E(d_{t-s})
italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_s end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
for all
s
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘ 
в„Ө
s\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_s вҲҲ blackboard_Z
under first-order stationarity.
вҲҺ
The next result states that the first-order stationary condition is also enough for the second-order stationary of the sequence of distances.
Theorem 2.6
.
A necessary and sufficient condition for
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
to be second-order stationary is that
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}+\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
.
Proof.
To show the sufficiency, we follow the strategy by
Rydberg and Shephard
(
1999
)
, where they showed that the temporal dynamic of a Poisson time series model (INGARCH) satisfies an ARMA representation.
Define
Пө
t
вүЎ
d
t
вҲ’
Ој
t
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\epsilon_{t}\equiv d_{t}-\mu_{t}
italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
. The sequence of distances
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
satisfies the following equations:
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
=
\displaystyle=
=
Ој
t
+
(
d
t
вҲ’
Ој
t
)
=
Ој
t
+
Пө
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\mu_{t}+(d_{t}-\mu_{t})=\mu_{t}+\epsilon_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
(6)
=
\displaystyle=
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҒў
d
t
вҲ’
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
Ој
t
вҲ’
j
+
Пө
t
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}d_{t-i}+\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}%
\mu_{t-j}+\epsilon_{t}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
=
\displaystyle=
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҒў
d
t
вҲ’
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
(
d
t
вҲ’
j
вҲ’
Пө
t
вҲ’
j
)
+
Пө
t
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}d_{t-i}+\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}(d%
_{t-j}-\epsilon_{t-j})+\epsilon_{t}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
=
\displaystyle=
=
П•
0
+
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
вҒў
d
t
вҲ’
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
вҒў
Пө
t
вҲ’
j
+
Пө
t
,
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘—
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\phi_{0}+\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})d_{t-i}-\sum_%
{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}\epsilon_{t-j}+\epsilon_{t},
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ,
for
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
t\in\mathbb{Z}
italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z
, where
П•
i
вүЎ
0
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
0
\phi_{i}\equiv 0
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ 0
for
i
>
p
рқ‘–
рқ‘қ
i>p
italic_i > italic_p
and
Оұ
j
вүЎ
0
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
0
\alpha_{j}\equiv 0
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ 0
for
j
>
q
рқ‘—
рқ‘һ
j>q
italic_j > italic_q
as before. We will now argue that
{
Пө
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\epsilon_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is a martingale difference sequence (MDS). First, from Theorem
2.4
and Corollary
2.5
, we have that
Пө
t
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\epsilon_{t}
italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is integrable under the condition
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}+\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
. More specifically,
E
вҒў
(
|
Пө
t
|
)
=
E
вҒў
(
|
d
t
вҲ’
Ој
t
|
)
вүӨ
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
+
E
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
=
2
вҒў
E
вҒў
(
d
t
)
=
2
вҒў
П•
0
1
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
вҲ’
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
<
вҲһ
рқҗё
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
2
рқҗё
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
2
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
E(|\epsilon_{t}|)=E(|d_{t}-\mu_{t}|)\leq E(d_{t})+E(\mu_{t})=2E(d_{t})=\dfrac{%
2\phi_{0}}{1-\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}-\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}%
\alpha_{j}}<\infty
italic_E ( | italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | ) = italic_E ( | italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | ) вүӨ italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) + italic_E ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = 2 italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG 2 italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG < вҲһ
. Further,
E
вҒў
(
Пө
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
вҲ’
E
вҒў
(
Ој
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
Ој
t
вҲ’
Ој
t
=
0
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
0
E(\epsilon_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})=E(d_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})-E(\mu_{t}|%
\mathcal{F}_{t-1})=\mu_{t}-\mu_{t}=0
italic_E ( italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) - italic_E ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0
, almost surely. Therefore,
{
Пө
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\epsilon_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is indeed an MDS with respect to
{
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. This fact and Equation (
6
) give us that
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
вҲј
ARMA
вҒў
(
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
,
q
)
similar-to
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
ARMA
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
рқ‘һ
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}\sim\mbox{ARMA}(\max(p,q),q)
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲј ARMA ( roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) , italic_q )
. Hence, it follows from the well-established ARMA results in the literature that
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is second-order stationary if all roots of the AR polynomial
ОҰ
вҒў
(
z
)
=
1
вҲ’
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
вҒў
z
i
ОҰ
рқ‘§
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
superscript
рқ‘§
рқ‘–
\Phi(z)=1-\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})z^{i}
roman_ОҰ ( italic_z ) = 1 - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_z start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
lie outside the unit circle, which along with the fact that the coefficients are all non-negative, it is equivalent to
вҲ‘
i
=
1
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
(
П•
i
+
Оұ
i
)
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘–
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{\max(p,q)}(\phi_{i}+\alpha_{i})<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) < 1
. Finally, the necessity comes from the first-order stationarity, which is valid under the assumption of the theorem. Under first-order stationarity, the mean of
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
given in Corollary
2.5
is necessarily positive since
d
t
>
0
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
0
d_{t}>0
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT > 0
. This immediately gives us that
вҲ‘
i
=
1
p
П•
i
+
вҲ‘
j
=
1
q
Оұ
j
<
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘–
1
рқ‘қ
subscript
italic-П•
рқ‘–
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘һ
subscript
рқӣј
рқ‘—
1
\displaystyle\sum_{i=1}^{p}\phi_{i}+\displaystyle\sum_{j=1}^{q}\alpha_{j}<1
вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_p end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_q end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
is necessary.
вҲҺ
Remark 2.7
.
Due to representation (
6
), the variance and autocovariance functions of
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
can be directly obtained from well-established results from ARMA processes provided in time series textbooks (e.g.
Brockwell and Davis
(
1991
)
). Hence, in particular, for an R-GARCH(1,1) model, we have that
Оі
вҒў
(
0
)
вүЎ
Var
вҒў
(
d
t
)
=
Пғ
Пө
2
вҒў
1
вҲ’
2
вҒў
П•
1
вҒў
Оұ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
1
2
1
вҲ’
(
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
)
2
рқӣҫ
0
Var
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
superscript
subscript
рқңҺ
italic-Пө
2
1
2
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
superscript
subscript
рқӣј
1
2
1
superscript
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
2
\displaystyle\gamma(0)\equiv\mbox{Var}(d_{t})=\sigma_{\epsilon}^{2}\dfrac{1-2%
\phi_{1}\alpha_{1}-\alpha_{1}^{2}}{1-(\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1})^{2}}
italic_Оі ( 0 ) вүЎ Var ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_Пғ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Пө end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG 1 - 2 italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG
and
ПҒ
вҒў
(
h
)
вүЎ
corr
вҒў
(
d
t
+
h
,
d
t
)
=
П•
1
вҒў
[
1
вҲ’
Оұ
1
вҒў
(
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
)
]
1
вҲ’
2
вҒў
П•
1
вҒў
Оұ
1
вҲ’
Оұ
1
2
вҒў
(
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
)
h
вҲ’
1
,
for
h
вүҘ
1
.
formulae-sequence
рқңҢ
в„Һ
corr
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
в„Һ
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
italic-П•
1
delimited-[]
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1
2
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
superscript
subscript
рқӣј
1
2
superscript
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
в„Һ
1
for
в„Һ
1
\displaystyle\rho(h)\equiv\mbox{corr}(d_{t+h},d_{t})=\dfrac{\phi_{1}[1-\alpha_%
{1}(\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1})]}{1-2\phi_{1}\alpha_{1}-\alpha_{1}^{2}}(\phi_{1}+%
\alpha_{1})^{h-1},\quad\mbox{for}\quad h\geq 1.
italic_ПҒ ( italic_h ) вүЎ corr ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + italic_h end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT [ 1 - italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ] end_ARG start_ARG 1 - 2 italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_h - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , for italic_h вүҘ 1 .
where
Пғ
Пө
2
вүЎ
Var
вҒў
(
Пө
t
)
superscript
subscript
рқңҺ
italic-Пө
2
Var
subscript
italic-Пө
рқ‘Ў
\sigma_{\epsilon}^{2}\equiv\mbox{Var}(\epsilon_{t})
italic_Пғ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Пө end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вүЎ Var ( italic_Пө start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
.
We end this subsection by establishing the ergodicity of the sequence of distances for an R-GARCH(1,1) model.
Theorem 2.8
.
Let
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
be the sequence of distances associated with an R-GARCH(1,1) model. Then, for
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
<
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1
\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1}<1
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
,
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is geometric ergodic.
Proof.
We will show that TweedieвҖҷs criterion
(
Meyn and Tweedie
,
1993
)
is satisfied for the test function
V
вҒў
(
x
)
=
1
+
x
рқ‘ү
рқ‘Ҙ
1
рқ‘Ҙ
V(x)=1+x
italic_V ( italic_x ) = 1 + italic_x
, for
x
>
0
рқ‘Ҙ
0
x>0
italic_x > 0
. This result and the Markovianity of
d
t
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
d_{t}
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
(under the R-GARCH(1,1) model framework) give us the desirable geometric ergodicity.
It follows that
E
вҒў
(
V
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
|
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
=
Ој
)
рқҗё
conditional
рқ‘ү
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқңҮ
\displaystyle E(V(\mu_{t})|\mu_{t-1}=\mu)
italic_E ( italic_V ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) | italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_Ој )
=
\displaystyle=
=
1
+
E
вҒў
(
Ој
t
|
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
=
Ој
)
1
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқңҮ
\displaystyle 1+E(\mu_{t}|\mu_{t-1}=\mu)
1 + italic_E ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_Ој )
=
\displaystyle=
=
1
+
E
вҒў
(
П•
0
+
П•
1
вҒў
d
+
Оұ
1
вҒў
Ој
)
1
рқҗё
subscript
italic-П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқӣј
1
рқңҮ
\displaystyle 1+E(\phi_{0}+\phi_{1}d+\alpha_{1}\mu)
1 + italic_E ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој )
=
\displaystyle=
=
1
+
П•
0
+
П•
1
вҒў
E
вҒў
(
d
)
+
Оұ
1
вҒў
Ој
1
+
Ој
вҒў
V
вҒў
(
Ој
)
.
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқӣј
1
рқңҮ
1
рқңҮ
рқ‘ү
рқңҮ
\displaystyle\dfrac{1+\phi_{0}+\phi_{1}E(d)+\alpha_{1}\mu}{1+\mu}V(\mu).
divide start_ARG 1 + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_E ( italic_d ) + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој end_ARG start_ARG 1 + italic_Ој end_ARG italic_V ( italic_Ој ) .
where
d
рқ‘‘
d
italic_d
is the distance associated with the Mallows model. By definition (model parameterisation), we have that
E
вҒў
(
d
)
=
Ој
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
рқңҮ
E(d)=\mu
italic_E ( italic_d ) = italic_Ој
. Hence,
1
+
П•
0
+
П•
1
вҒў
E
вҒў
(
d
)
+
Оұ
1
вҒў
Ој
1
+
Ој
=
1
+
П•
0
+
Ој
вҒў
(
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
)
1
+
Ој
вҶ’
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
<
1
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
1
рқҗё
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқӣј
1
рқңҮ
1
рқңҮ
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
рқңҮ
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1
рқңҮ
вҶ’
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1
\dfrac{1+\phi_{0}+\phi_{1}E(d)+\alpha_{1}\mu}{1+\mu}=\dfrac{1+\phi_{0}+\mu(%
\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1})}{1+\mu}\rightarrow\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1}<1
divide start_ARG 1 + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_E ( italic_d ) + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој end_ARG start_ARG 1 + italic_Ој end_ARG = divide start_ARG 1 + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Ој ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG 1 + italic_Ој end_ARG вҶ’ italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
as
Ој
вҶ’
вҲһ
вҶ’
рқңҮ
\mu\rightarrow\infty
italic_Ој вҶ’ вҲһ
, where we have used the hypothesis of the theorem that
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
<
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1
\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1}<1
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT < 1
. Further, note that
Ој
рқңҮ
\mu
italic_Ој
is bounded away from zero since the smallest reachable point of
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is
Ој
вҲ—
=
Оұ
0
1
вҲ’
Оұ
1
subscript
рқңҮ
subscript
рқӣј
0
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
\mu_{*}=\dfrac{\alpha_{0}}{1-\alpha_{1}}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = divide start_ARG italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 1 - italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG
(fix point of the skeleton
Ој
t
=
Оұ
0
+
Оұ
1
вҒў
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣј
0
subscript
рқӣј
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mu_{t}=\alpha_{0}+\alpha_{1}\mu_{t-1}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
). Therefore, there exist constants
Оә
1
вҲҲ
(
0
,
1
)
subscript
рқң…
1
0
1
\kappa_{1}\in(0,1)
italic_Оә start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲҲ ( 0 , 1 )
,
Оә
2
>
0
subscript
рқң…
2
0
\kappa_{2}>0
italic_Оә start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT > 0
and
Ој
ВҜ
>
Ој
вҲ—
ВҜ
рқңҮ
subscript
рқңҮ
\bar{\mu}>\mu_{*}
overВҜ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG > italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
such that
E
вҒў
(
V
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
|
Ој
t
вҲ’
1
=
Ој
)
вүӨ
(
1
вҲ’
Оә
1
)
вҒў
V
вҒў
(
Ој
)
+
Оә
2
вҒў
I
вҒў
{
Ој
вҲҲ
(
Ој
вҲ—
,
Ој
ВҜ
)
}
,
рқҗё
conditional
рқ‘ү
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқңҮ
1
subscript
рқң…
1
рқ‘ү
рқңҮ
subscript
рқң…
2
рқҗј
рқңҮ
subscript
рқңҮ
ВҜ
рқңҮ
\displaystyle E(V(\mu_{t})|\mu_{t-1}=\mu)\leq(1-\kappa_{1})V(\mu)+\kappa_{2}I%
\{\mu\in(\mu_{*},\bar{\mu})\},
italic_E ( italic_V ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) | italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_Ој ) вүӨ ( 1 - italic_Оә start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_V ( italic_Ој ) + italic_Оә start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_I { italic_Ој вҲҲ ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , overВҜ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG ) } ,
(7)
where
I
вҒў
{
вӢ…
}
рқҗј
вӢ…
I\{\cdot\}
italic_I { вӢ… }
is the indicator function, and the existence of
Оә
2
subscript
рқң…
2
\kappa_{2}
italic_Оә start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
follows from the fact that the function
1
+
П•
0
+
Ој
вҒў
(
П•
1
+
Оұ
1
)
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
рқңҮ
subscript
italic-П•
1
subscript
рқӣј
1
1+\phi_{0}+\mu(\phi_{1}+\alpha_{1})
1 + italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Ој ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
is bounded on the interval
(
Ој
вҲ—
,
Ој
ВҜ
)
subscript
рқңҮ
ВҜ
рқңҮ
(\mu_{*},\bar{\mu})
( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , overВҜ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG )
. Since TweedieвҖҷs criterion (
7
) is satisfied, the geometric ergodicity of
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
holds.
вҲҺ
The following two sections are concerned with parameter estimation, where the main aim is to learn
П•
0
,
П•
,
рқң¶
subscript
italic-П•
0
bold-italic-П•
рқң¶
\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi},\boldsymbol{\alpha}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• , bold_italic_Оұ
from observed ranking time series. Section
3
is devoted to model inference when
рққ…
ВҜ
ВҜ
рққ…
\underline{\boldsymbol{\pi}}
underВҜ start_ARG bold_italic_ПҖ end_ARG
are complete ranks, while the missing value case is covered in Section
4
.
3
Inference Under Complete Rankings
Let
ПҖ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
n
subscript
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ӣ
\pi_{1},\ldots,\pi_{n}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
be an observed time series of rankings from an
R-GARCH
вҒў
(
p
,
q
)
R-GARCH
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
\mbox{R-GARCH}(p,q)
R-GARCH ( italic_p , italic_q )
model as given in Definition
2.1
. Let
рқң·
=
(
П•
0
,
П•
вҠӨ
,
рқң¶
вҠӨ
)
вҠӨ
рқң·
superscript
subscript
italic-П•
0
superscript
bold-italic-П•
top
superscript
рқң¶
top
top
\boldsymbol{\beta}=(\phi_{0},\boldsymbol{\phi}^{\top},\boldsymbol{\alpha}^{%
\top})^{\top}
bold_italic_ОІ = ( italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , bold_italic_П• start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_Оұ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
be the parameter vector. The log-likelihood function
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
в„“
рқң·
\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})
roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ )
assumes the form
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вүЎ
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
{
вҲ’
Оё
t
вҒў
d
t
вҲ’
log
вҒЎ
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
}
=
вҲ’
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
{
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
вҒў
d
t
+
log
вҒЎ
ПҲ
вҒў
(
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
)
}
,
в„“
рқң·
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқң“
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқң“
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\displaystyle\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})=\sum_{t=m+1}^{n}\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{%
\beta})\equiv\sum_{t=m+1}^{n}\{-\theta_{t}d_{t}-\log\psi(\theta_{t})\}=-\sum_{%
t=m+1}^{n}\{g^{-1}(\mu_{t})d_{t}+\log\psi(g^{-1}(\mu_{t}))\},
roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) вүЎ вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT { - italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - roman_log italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) } = - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT { italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + roman_log italic_ПҲ ( italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) } ,
(8)
where
m
=
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
m=\max(p,q)
italic_m = roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q )
,
d
t
вүЎ
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d_{t}\equiv d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})
italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, and
Ој
t
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\mu_{t}
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
as in Equation (
2.1
).
Fitting the R-GARCH model to observed complete ranking can be straightforwardly done via conditional maximum likelihood estimation. This consists of optimising the log-likelihood function with respect to
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
, that is, the conditional maximum likelihood estimator (CMLE) of
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
is given by
рқң·
^
=
argmax
рқң·
вҒў
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
^
рқң·
subscript
argmax
рқң·
в„“
рқң·
\widehat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}=\mbox{argmax}_{\boldsymbol{\beta}}\ell(%
\boldsymbol{\beta})
over^ start_ARG bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG = argmax start_POSTSUBSCRIPT bold_italic_ОІ end_POSTSUBSCRIPT roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ )
. Standard maximisation routines such as
R
вҖҷs
optim
can be employed on this task, producing parameter estimates at a cheap computational cost.
The score function associated with
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
в„“
рқң·
\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})
roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ )
, say
рқҗ”
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
вҲӮ
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
/
вҲӮ
рқң·
рқҗ”
рқң·
в„“
рқң·
рқң·
{\bf U}(\boldsymbol{\beta})=\partial\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})/\partial%
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_U ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = вҲӮ roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ ) / вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ
, has components given by
вҲӮ
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
=
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
вҲӮ
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
=
вҲ’
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
{
d
t
+
ПҲ
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
}
вҒў
вҲӮ
Оё
t
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
,
в„“
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
superscript
рқң“
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
рқң“
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
\displaystyle\dfrac{\partial\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\beta_{j}}=\sum_%
{t=m+1}^{n}\dfrac{\partial\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\beta_{j}}=-%
\sum_{t=m+1}^{n}\left\{d_{t}+\dfrac{\psi^{\prime}(\theta_{t})}{\psi(\theta_{t}%
)}\right\}\dfrac{\partial\theta_{t}}{\partial\mu_{t}}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{%
\partial\beta_{j}},
divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT { italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT + divide start_ARG italic_ПҲ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG } divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG ,
for
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
+
q
+
1
рқ‘—
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
j=1,\ldots,p+q+1
italic_j = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_p + italic_q + 1
, where
Оё
t
=
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}=g^{-1}(\mu_{t})
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
and
ПҲ
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
=
d
вҒў
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
)
/
d
вҒў
Оё
superscript
рқң“
вҖІ
рқңғ
рқ‘‘
рқң“
рқңғ
рқ‘‘
рқңғ
\psi^{\prime}(\theta)=d\psi(\theta)/d\theta
italic_ПҲ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё ) = italic_d italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё ) / italic_d italic_Оё
. By using that
вҲӮ
Оё
t
вҲӮ
Ој
t
=
1
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
g
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
Ој
t
)
)
=
1
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
superscript
рқ‘”
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\dfrac{\partial\theta_{t}}{\partial\mu_{t}}=\dfrac{1}{g^{\prime}\left(g^{-1}(%
\mu_{t})\right)}=\dfrac{1}{g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})}
divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) end_ARG = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG
and
d
вҒў
log
вҒЎ
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
d
вҒў
Оё
t
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
Ој
t
рқ‘‘
рқң“
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
\dfrac{d\log\psi(\theta_{t})}{d\theta_{t}}=E(d_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})=\mu_{t}
divide start_ARG italic_d roman_log italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_d italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, we obtain that the score function can be expressed by
вҲӮ
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
=
вҲ’
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
d
t
вҲ’
Ој
t
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
,
j
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
+
q
+
1
.
formulae-sequence
в„“
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
рқ‘—
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
\displaystyle\dfrac{\partial\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\beta_{j}}=-\sum%
_{t=m+1}^{n}\dfrac{d_{t}-\mu_{t}}{g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t%
}}{\partial\beta_{j}},\quad j=1,\ldots,p+q+1.
divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = - вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT divide start_ARG italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT - italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG , italic_j = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_p + italic_q + 1 .
(9)
The score function (
9
) admits a simple matrix representation:
рқҗ”
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
вҲ’
рқҗ—
вҒў
рқ‘«
вҒў
(
рқҗқ
вҲ’
рққҒ
)
рқҗ”
рқң·
рқҗ—
рқ‘«
рқҗқ
рққҒ
{\bf U}(\boldsymbol{\beta})=-{\bf X}\boldsymbol{D}({\bf d}-{\boldsymbol{\mu}})
bold_U ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = - bold_X bold_italic_D ( bold_d - bold_italic_Ој )
, where
рқҗ—
рқҗ—
{\bf X}
bold_X
is a matrix
p
+
q
+
1
Г—
n
вҲ’
m
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ҡ
p+q+1\times n-m
italic_p + italic_q + 1 Г— italic_n - italic_m
with elements
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
j
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘—
\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{j}}
divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG
,
рқҗғ
=
diag
вҒў
{
1
/
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
m
+
1
)
,
вҖҰ
,
1
/
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
n
)
}
рқҗғ
diag
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘ҡ
1
вҖҰ
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘ӣ
{\bf D}=\mbox{diag}\{1/g^{\prime}(\theta_{m+1}),\ldots,1/g^{\prime}(\theta_{n})\}
bold_D = diag { 1 / italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) , вҖҰ , 1 / italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) }
,
рқҗқ
=
(
d
m
+
1
,
вҖҰ
,
d
n
)
вҠӨ
рқҗқ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘ҡ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘ӣ
top
{\bf d}=(d_{m+1},\ldots,d_{n})^{\top}
bold_d = ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
and
рққҒ
=
(
Ој
m
+
1
,
вҖҰ
,
Ој
n
)
вҠӨ
рққҒ
superscript
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘ҡ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘ӣ
top
\boldsymbol{\mu}=(\mu_{m+1},\ldots,\mu_{n})^{\top}
bold_italic_Ој = ( italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
. Furthermore, this analytical form can be provided in the optimisation to improve the performance of
optim
in
R
.
We now discuss obtaining the standard errors of the maximum likelihood estimates. First, we argue that our R-GARCH models satisfy the second Bartlett identity
E
вҒў
(
вҲӮ
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҒў
вҲӮ
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҠӨ
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
вҲ’
E
вҒў
(
вҲӮ
2
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҒў
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҠӨ
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
рқң·
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
superscript
рқң·
top
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқҗё
conditional
superscript
2
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
рқң·
superscript
рқң·
top
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
E\left(\dfrac{\partial\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\boldsymbol{\beta}%
}\dfrac{\partial\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\boldsymbol{\beta}^{\top%
}}\bigg{|}\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)=-E\left(\dfrac{\partial^{2}\ell_{t}(%
\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\boldsymbol{\beta}\partial\boldsymbol{\beta}^{%
\top}}\bigg{|}\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)
italic_E ( divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = - italic_E ( divide start_ARG вҲӮ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
.
For
k
,
l
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
+
q
+
1
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
рқ‘ҷ
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
k,l=1,\ldots,p+q+1
italic_k , italic_l = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_p + italic_q + 1
, we have that
вҲ’
E
вҒў
(
вҲӮ
2
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
1
(
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
)
2
вҒў
d
2
вҒў
log
вҒЎ
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
d
вҒў
Оё
t
2
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
=
1
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
,
рқҗё
conditional
superscript
2
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
superscript
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
2
superscript
рқ‘‘
2
рқң“
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
superscript
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
2
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
\displaystyle-E\left(\dfrac{\partial^{2}\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial%
\beta_{k}\partial\beta_{l}}\bigg{|}\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)=\dfrac{1}{\left(g^%
{\prime}(\theta_{t})\right)^{2}}\dfrac{d^{2}\log\psi(\theta_{t})}{d\theta_{t}^%
{2}}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{k}}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial%
\beta_{l}}=\dfrac{1}{g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial%
\beta_{k}}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{l}},
- italic_E ( divide start_ARG вҲӮ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG ( italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG italic_d start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_log italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_d italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG ,
(10)
where we have used the fact
Ој
t
=
E
вҒў
(
d
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mu_{t}=E(d_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})
italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_E ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
and
d
2
вҒў
log
вҒЎ
ПҲ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
d
вҒў
Оё
t
2
=
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
superscript
рқ‘‘
2
рқң“
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘‘
superscript
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
2
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\dfrac{d^{2}\log\psi(\theta_{t})}{d\theta_{t}^{2}}=g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})
divide start_ARG italic_d start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_log italic_ПҲ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_d italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, the last one following from exponential family properties. By using that
Var
вҒў
(
d
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
Var
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\mbox{Var}(d_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})=g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})
Var ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, we obtain that
E
вҒў
(
вҲӮ
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
1
(
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
)
2
вҒў
Var
вҒў
(
d
t
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
=
1
g
вҖІ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
)
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
k
вҒў
вҲӮ
Ој
t
вҲӮ
ОІ
l
,
рқҗё
conditional
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
superscript
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
2
Var
conditional
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
1
superscript
рқ‘”
вҖІ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқӣҪ
рқ‘ҷ
\displaystyle E\left(\dfrac{\partial\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial%
\beta_{k}}\dfrac{\partial\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\beta_{l}}\bigg%
{|}\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)=\dfrac{1}{\left(g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})\right)^{2}}%
\mbox{Var}(d_{t}|\mathcal{F}_{t-1})\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{k}}%
\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{l}}=\dfrac{1}{g^{\prime}(\theta_{t})}%
\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial\beta_{k}}\dfrac{\partial\mu_{t}}{\partial%
\beta_{l}},
italic_E ( divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG ( italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG Var ( italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_g start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҖІ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG divide start_ARG вҲӮ italic_Ој start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ italic_ОІ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG ,
for
k
,
l
=
1
,
вҖҰ
,
p
+
q
+
1
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
рқ‘ҷ
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
k,l=1,\ldots,p+q+1
italic_k , italic_l = 1 , вҖҰ , italic_p + italic_q + 1
, which is equal to (
10
), and therefore it confirms our claim about the second Bartlett identity. The total information matrix, say
рқҗҠ
n
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
рқҗҠ
рқ‘ӣ
рқң·
{\bf K}_{n}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
bold_K start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
, can be expressed as
рқҗҠ
n
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
E
вҒў
(
вҲ’
вҲӮ
2
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҒў
вҲӮ
рқң·
вҠӨ
|
в„ұ
t
вҲ’
1
)
=
рқҗ—рқҗғрқҗ—
вҠӨ
,
subscript
рқҗҠ
рқ‘ӣ
рқң·
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
рқҗё
conditional
superscript
2
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
рқң·
superscript
рқң·
top
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
1
superscript
рқҗ—рқҗғрқҗ—
top
\displaystyle{\bf K}_{n}(\boldsymbol{\beta})=\sum_{t=m+1}^{n}E\left(-\dfrac{%
\partial^{2}\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})}{\partial\boldsymbol{\beta}\partial%
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{\top}}\bigg{|}\mathcal{F}_{t-1}\right)={\bf X}{\bf D}{\bf X%
}^{\top},
bold_K start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_E ( - divide start_ARG вҲӮ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) end_ARG start_ARG вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ вҲӮ bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_ARG | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = bold_XDX start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ,
where the matrices
рқҗ—
рқҗ—
{\bf X}
bold_X
and
рқҗғ
рқҗғ
{\bf D}
bold_D
are defined below Equation (
9
).
Under stationarity and ergodicity of
{
d
t
}
t
вҲҲ
в„Ө
subscript
subscript
рқ‘‘
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
в„Ө
\{d_{t}\}_{t\in\mathbb{Z}}
{ italic_d start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t вҲҲ blackboard_Z end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, the asymptotic normality of the MLEs can be established:
n
вҒў
(
рқң·
^
вҲ’
рқң·
)
вҹ¶
d
N
вҒў
(
рқҹҺ
,
рқҡә
)
superscript
вҹ¶
рқ‘‘
рқ‘ӣ
^
рқң·
рқң·
рқ‘Ғ
0
рқҡә
\sqrt{n}({\widehat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}}-\boldsymbol{\beta})\stackrel{{%
\scriptstyle d}}{{\longrightarrow}}N({\boldsymbol{0}},\boldsymbol{\Sigma})
square-root start_ARG italic_n end_ARG ( over^ start_ARG bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG - bold_italic_ОІ ) start_RELOP SUPERSCRIPTOP start_ARG вҹ¶ end_ARG start_ARG italic_d end_ARG end_RELOP italic_N ( bold_0 , bold_ОЈ )
as
n
вҶ’
вҲһ
вҶ’
рқ‘ӣ
n\rightarrow\infty
italic_n вҶ’ вҲһ
, where
рқҡә
=
plim
n
вҶ’
вҲһ
вҒў
n
вҲ’
1
вҒў
рқҗҠ
n
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
рқҡә
subscript
plim
вҶ’
рқ‘ӣ
superscript
рқ‘ӣ
1
subscript
рқҗҠ
рқ‘ӣ
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\Sigma}=\mbox{plim}_{n\rightarrow\infty}n^{-1}{\bf K}_{n}(%
\boldsymbol{\beta})
bold_ОЈ = plim start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n вҶ’ вҲһ end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT bold_K start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
, with
plim
denoting the limit in probability. Note that we formally found the condition to ensure stationarity and ergodicity of the distance sequence under an R-GARCH(1,1) model in Theorem
2.8
. The standard errors of the maximum likelihood estimates can be obtained by the diagonal elements of the inverse of the total information matrix, that is
рқҗҠ
n
вҲ’
1
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
(
рқҗ—рқҗғрқҗ—
вҠӨ
)
вҲ’
1
superscript
subscript
рқҗҠ
рқ‘ӣ
1
рқң·
superscript
superscript
рқҗ—рқҗғрқҗ—
top
1
{\bf K}_{n}^{-1}(\boldsymbol{\beta})=({\bf X}{\bf D}{\bf X}^{\top})^{-1}
bold_K start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = ( bold_XDX start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
.
To evaluate the finite sample performance of the R-GARCH maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs)
рқң·
^
вүЎ
(
П•
^
0
,
П•
^
вҠӨ
,
рқң¶
^
вҠӨ
)
вҠӨ
^
рқң·
superscript
subscript
^
italic-П•
0
superscript
^
bold-italic-П•
top
superscript
^
рқң¶
top
top
\widehat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}\equiv(\widehat{\phi}_{0},\widehat{\boldsymbol{%
\phi}}^{\top},\widehat{\boldsymbol{\alpha}}^{\top})^{\top}
over^ start_ARG bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG вүЎ ( over^ start_ARG italic_П• end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG bold_italic_П• end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG bold_italic_Оұ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
, some simulation experiments are carried out. To this end, R-GARCH trajectories are generated under different parameter configurations and sample sizes. Our first experiment takes
k
=
10
,
П•
0
=
1
,
П•
1
=
0.4
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
10
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.4
k=10,\phi_{0}=1,\phi_{1}=0.4
italic_k = 10 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 1 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.4
and
n
=
200
,
500
рқ‘ӣ
200
500
n=200,500
italic_n = 200 , 500
. With each
n
рқ‘ӣ
n
italic_n
, one thousand trajectories are simulated, and
рқң·
^
bold-^
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\widehat{\beta}}
overbold_^ start_ARG bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG
is computed. Results are summarised in Figure
4
and Table
1
. On the right, boxplots illustrate the distribution of
рқң·
^
=
(
П•
^
0
,
П•
^
1
)
вҠӨ
bold-^
рқң·
superscript
subscript
^
italic-П•
0
subscript
^
italic-П•
1
top
\boldsymbol{\widehat{\beta}}=(\widehat{\phi}_{0},\widehat{\phi}_{1})^{\top}
overbold_^ start_ARG bold_italic_ОІ end_ARG = ( over^ start_ARG italic_П• end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_П• end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҠӨ end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
by sample size, with vertical dashed lines indicating the true parameter values used to generate the data. As expected, estimates are centered at the true values and variability decreases with the increase in sample size. A numerical summary of the same experiment is displayed in Table
1
where the Monte Carlo estimate, standard deviation, and mean squared error (MSE) are enclosed.
Figure 4:
Boxplots of maximum likelihood estimates fitted to one thousand R-GARCH data sets simulated with
k
=
10
,
П•
0
=
1
,
П•
1
=
0.4
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
10
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.4
k=10,\phi_{0}=1,\phi_{1}=0.4
italic_k = 10 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 1 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.4
. This is repeated considering the sample sizes
n
=
200
рқ‘ӣ
200
n=200
italic_n = 200
and
n
=
500
рқ‘ӣ
500
n=500
italic_n = 500
which are shown in different colors. True parameter values are indicated by vertical dashed lines.
n
рқ‘ӣ
n
italic_n
Mean
SD
MSE
П•
0
=
1
subscript
italic-П•
0
1
\phi_{0}=1
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 1
200
1.014
0.125
0.016
500
1.005
0.079
0.006
П•
1
=
0.4
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.4
\phi_{1}=0.4
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.4
200
0.387
0.070
0.005
500
0.396
0.047
0.002
Table 1:
Monte Carlo mean, standard deviation, and Mean Squared Error (MSE) associated with the first simulation experiment.
A second simulation setting is performed with a larger item set
k
=
20
рқ‘ҳ
20
k=20
italic_k = 20
, including AR and feedback effects in the model. Parameter values are set to
П•
0
=
3
,
П•
1
=
0.2
,
Оұ
1
=
0.3
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.2
subscript
рқӣј
1
0.3
\phi_{0}=3,\phi_{1}=0.2,\alpha_{1}=0.3
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.2 , italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
and the same sample sizes
n
=
200
,
500
рқ‘ӣ
200
500
n=200,500
italic_n = 200 , 500
and Monte Carlo replications are explored. Results are illustrated with boxplots in Figure
5
, and numerical summaries can be found in Table
2
.
As before, all model parameters are well estimated and there is a reduction in the standard errors and MSE as
n
рқ‘ӣ
n
italic_n
increases.
Figure 5:
Boxplots of maximum likelihood estimates fitted to one thousand R-GARCH data sets simulated with
k
=
20
,
П•
0
=
3
,
П•
1
=
0.2
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
20
formulae-sequence
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.2
k=20,\phi_{0}=3,\phi_{1}=0.2
italic_k = 20 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.2
and
Оұ
1
=
0.3
subscript
рқӣј
1
0.3
\alpha_{1}=0.3
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
. This is repeated considering the sample sizes
n
=
200
рқ‘ӣ
200
n=200
italic_n = 200
and
n
=
500
рқ‘ӣ
500
n=500
italic_n = 500
which are shown in different colors. Vertical dashed lines indicate true parameter values.
n
рқ‘ӣ
n
italic_n
Mean
SD
MSE
П•
0
=
3
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
\phi_{0}=3
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3
200
3.063
0.875
0.768
500
3.067
0.782
0.615
П•
1
=
0.2
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.2
\phi_{1}=0.2
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.2
200
0.196
0.058
0.003
500
0.200
0.043
0.002
Оұ
1
=
0.3
subscript
рқӣј
1
0.3
\alpha_{1}=0.3
italic_Оұ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.3
200
0.294
0.160
0.026
500
0.288
0.143
0.020
Table 2:
Monte Carlo mean, standard deviation, and Mean Squared Error (MSE) associated with the second simulation experiment.
The studies presented in this section provide evidence of adequate performance of the conditional maximum likelihood estimation for obtaining point estimates of the R-GARCH parameters under the scenarios considered. The results validate the proposed inferential procedure for complete rankings, showing that the CMLEs perform adequately in practice.
4
Estimation Under Incomplete Rankings
In many situations, the observed data
ПҖ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
n
subscript
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ӣ
\pi_{1},\ldots,\pi_{n}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
may involve incompleteness in a way that some (or all)
ПҖ
i
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘–
\pi_{i}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
do not rank the entire item set. For example, in top
вҲ’
l
рқ‘ҷ
-l
- italic_l
elicitation, judges choose their top
l
рқ‘ҷ
l
italic_l
favorite alternatives, so positions
ПҖ
вҒў
(
l
+
1
)
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
вҒў
(
k
)
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
1
вҖҰ
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҳ
\pi(l+1),\ldots,\pi(k)
italic_ПҖ ( italic_l + 1 ) , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ ( italic_k )
are not observed. It is also common to evaluate choices by presenting a judge with pairs
{
i
,
j
}
,
i
вү 
j
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
\{i,j\},i\neq j
{ italic_i , italic_j } , italic_i вү  italic_j
, where
i
,
j
вҲҲ
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
k
}
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
i,j\in\{1,\ldots,k\}
italic_i , italic_j вҲҲ { 1 , вҖҰ , italic_k }
. In this setting, the pairwise preference is
i
вү»
j
succeeds
рқ‘–
рқ‘—
i\succ j
italic_i вү» italic_j
or
j
вү»
i
succeeds
рқ‘—
рқ‘–
j\succ i
italic_j вү» italic_i
but most often, one does not make all pairwise choices necessary to induce a full ranking. For instance, let
k
=
3
рқ‘ҳ
3
k=3
italic_k = 3
and
рқ’®
рқ’®
\mathcal{S}
caligraphic_S
denote the set of observed pairwise comparisons. If
рқ’®
=
{
1
вү»
2
\mathcal{S}=\{1\succ 2
caligraphic_S = { 1 вү» 2
,
1
вү»
3
succeeds
1
3
1\succ 3
1 вү» 3
} is collected, there are two complete rankings that are compatible with it, these being
ПҖ
=
(
1
,
2
,
3
)
рқңӢ
1
2
3
\pi=(1,2,3)
italic_ПҖ = ( 1 , 2 , 3 )
and
ПҖ
=
(
1
,
3
,
2
)
рқңӢ
1
3
2
\pi=(1,3,2)
italic_ПҖ = ( 1 , 3 , 2 )
. In what follows, the notation
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
shall indicate that
ПҖ
рқңӢ
\pi
italic_ПҖ
is incomplete and
R
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
)
рқ‘…
~
рқңӢ
R(\tilde{\pi})
italic_R ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG )
be the set of compatible complete ranks (
R
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
)
=
{
(
1
,
2
,
3
)
,
(
1
,
3
,
2
)
}
рқ‘…
~
рқңӢ
1
2
3
1
3
2
R(\tilde{\pi})=\{(1,2,3),(1,3,2)\}
italic_R ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG ) = { ( 1 , 2 , 3 ) , ( 1 , 3 , 2 ) }
in the example above).
The most common approach to handle incompleteness in Mallows-type models is to assume that there exists a latent complete rank associated with
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
. The latter is assumed to be a random variable following some prior distribution that is consistent with the observed piece
ПҖ
~
~
рқңӢ
\tilde{\pi}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
. In the simplest case,
ПҖ
рқңӢ
{\pi}
italic_ПҖ
follows an Uniform distribution over
R
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
)
рқ‘…
~
рқңӢ
R(\tilde{\pi})
italic_R ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG )
and
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
j
)
=
1
/
n
m
вҒў
i
вҒў
s
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
j
)
!
рқ‘қ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
1
subscript
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘–
рқ‘ 
subscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
p({\pi}_{j})=1/n_{mis}(\tilde{\pi}_{j})!
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) = 1 / italic_n start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_m italic_i italic_s end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) !
, where
n
m
вҒў
i
вҒў
s
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
j
)
subscript
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘–
рқ‘ 
subscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
n_{mis}(\tilde{\pi}_{j})
italic_n start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_m italic_i italic_s end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
is the number of missing entries in
ПҖ
~
j
subscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
\tilde{\pi}_{j}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
.
In the R-GARCH context, having incomplete ranks becomes a somewhat more complex problem in comparison to when observations in
ПҖ
ВҜ
ВҜ
рқңӢ
\underline{\pi}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
are independent. This is because our model formulation involves the sequence of distances, which cannot be computed if missingness is present. The following subsection is devoted to the challenging problem of performing inference in this scenario. We will refer to the Expectation-Maximisation (EM) algorithm, outlining in detail all ingredients necessary to handle incomplete R-GARCH observations.
4.1
Monte Carlo EM Algorithm
The Expectation-Maximisation (EM) algorithm is perhaps the most well-known tool for performing statistical inference in the presence of missing information. Consider an arbitrary observed ranking time series
ПҖ
ВҜ
o
superscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘ң
\underline{\pi}^{o}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_o end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
that contains only partial information, and a joint probability model
p
o
(
вӢ…
|
рқң·
)
p_{o}(\cdot|\boldsymbol{\beta})
italic_p start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_o end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( вӢ… | bold_italic_ОІ )
associated with it. Our goal is to estimate the parameter vector
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
, but
p
o
(
вӢ…
|
рқң·
)
p_{o}(\cdot|\boldsymbol{\beta})
italic_p start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_o end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( вӢ… | bold_italic_ОІ )
can only be evaluated under complete observations. The unobserved rankings (missing observations) are here denoted by
ПҖ
~
u
superscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘ў
\widetilde{\pi}^{u}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_u end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
, which will play the rule of auxiliary random variables in our EM algorithm. The joint probability function of
ПҖ
~
u
superscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘ў
\widetilde{\pi}^{u}
over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_u end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
will be denoted by
p
u
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
subscript
рқ‘қ
рқ‘ў
вӢ…
p_{u}(\cdot)
italic_p start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_u end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( вӢ… )
. The distribution of the latent variable(s)
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
{\pi}_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
will be assumed to be discrete Uniform over
в„ӣ
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
t
u
)
в„ӣ
subscript
superscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘ў
рқ‘Ў
\mathcal{R}(\widetilde{\pi}^{u}_{t})
caligraphic_R ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_u end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, as explained above. Moreover, independence among the missingness will be assumed for simplicity. The complete data is then denoted by
ПҖ
ВҜ
=
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
o
,
ПҖ
~
u
)
ВҜ
рқңӢ
superscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘ң
superscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘ў
\underline{\pi}=(\underline{\pi}^{o},\widetilde{\pi}^{u})
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG = ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_o end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_u end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
.
For the R-GARCH model, the complete log-likelihood function, say
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
рқң·
\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
, assumes the form (
8
).
An important remark to make is that computation of
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
in (
8
) depends on completeness of
ПҖ
t
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
\pi_{t},\ldots,\pi_{\max(p,q)-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. For example, an R-GARCH(2,0) model requires that
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
\pi_{t-1},\pi_{t-2}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
3
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
3
\pi_{t-3}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 3 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are also complete in addition to
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. From Definition
2.1
, it is obvious that if either
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
or
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t-1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
have missing entries,
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
cannot be obtained since
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
d({\pi}_{t},{\pi}_{t-1})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
is unavailable. In addition, computation of
Оё
t
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
\theta_{t}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
involves the lagged distances
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
i
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘–
1
d({\pi}_{t-i},{\pi}_{t-i-1})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - italic_i - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, so completeness of observations
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
2
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
2
\pi_{t-2}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
3
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
3
\pi_{t-3}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 3 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is also required when
(
p
,
q
)
=
(
2
,
0
)
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
2
0
(p,q)=(2,0)
( italic_p , italic_q ) = ( 2 , 0 )
.
We here propose a Monte Carlo EM-type (MCEM) algorithm due to the inability of the computation of both observed log-likelihood function and conditional expectations involved in the EM-algorithm. To handle these situations, the MCEM was first introduced in
Wei and Tanner
(
1990
)
in the context of genetics. In this version, the
Q
рқ‘„
Q
italic_Q
-function to be maximised is approximated using simulations from the conditional distribution. MCEM variants differ in how the simulations are done, with some important implementations being the Stochastic Approximation EM (SAEM), Markov Chain Monte Carlo EM (MCMCEM), and Sequential Monte Carlo EM (SMCEM).
Let us start by describing the Monte Carlo E-step of our algorithm. If
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
-th term of the complete log-likelihood function involves a partial ranking, we complete the ranking by generating samples from the uniform distribution as specified above conditional on the partial ranking and by using
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
as the parameter vector in the generation; the superscript here refers to the
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
рқ‘ҹ
1
(r-1)
( italic_r - 1 )
-th step of the MCEM algorithm. We consider
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
imputations and then replace the
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
-th term of the complete log-likelihood function with the average of the imputed terms, which we denote by
в„“
~
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
~
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\widetilde{\ell}_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
over~ start_ARG roman_в„“ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
. No action is required if the
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
-th term of the complete log-likelihood function does not involve missingness; in this case,
в„“
~
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
=
в„“
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
~
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
subscript
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\widetilde{\ell}_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})=\ell_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
over~ start_ARG roman_в„“ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) = roman_в„“ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
. Hence, we define the
Q
рқ‘„
Q
italic_Q
-function to be maximised as
Q
вҒў
(
рқң·
;
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
=
вҲ‘
t
=
m
+
1
n
в„“
~
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
.
рқ‘„
рқң·
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
superscript
subscript
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҡ
1
рқ‘ӣ
subscript
~
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\displaystyle Q(\boldsymbol{\beta};\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})=\sum_{t=m+1}^{n%
}\widetilde{\ell}_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta}).
italic_Q ( bold_italic_ОІ ; bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) = вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = italic_m + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_n end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT over~ start_ARG roman_в„“ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ ) .
(11)
It is important to note that
в„“
~
t
вҒў
(
рқң·
)
subscript
~
в„“
рқ‘Ў
рқң·
\widetilde{\ell}_{t}(\boldsymbol{\beta})
over~ start_ARG roman_в„“ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ )
implicitly depends on
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
, which denotes the MCEM estimate of
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
in the
r
рқ‘ҹ
r
italic_r
-th loop of the algorithm. The M-step consists of maximising (
11
) with respect to
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
; the maximiser is denoted by
рқң·
(
r
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
. At iteration
r
рқ‘ҹ
r
italic_r
of the MCEM algorithm, convergence is assessed based on some pre-specified criterion that compares
рқң·
(
r
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
and
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
.
The strategy outlined in our R-GARCH MCEM algorithm is based on the implementations proposed by
Levine and Casella
(
2001
)
and
Chan and Ledolter
(
1995
)
. These works deal carefully with the crucial aspects of any MCEM implementation which are the
number of auxiliary samples
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
and the
stopping criterion
. Extra care must be taken when setting MCEM stopping rules, in comparison to the standard EM. This is because the algorithm must now account for the fact that there is a Monte Carlo error involved in
Q
вҒў
(
вӢ…
,
вӢ…
)
рқ‘„
вӢ…
вӢ…
Q(\cdot,\cdot)
italic_Q ( вӢ… , вӢ… )
, which is determined by
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
. To approach this,
Levine and Casella
(
2001
)
and
Chan and Ledolter
(
1995
)
suggest to monitor the difference in the log-likelihood along iterations of the algorithm. The idea is that if the MLE has been reached, the change
О”
вҒў
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
вүЎ
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
)
вҲ’
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
О”
в„“
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
в„“
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
в„“
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\Delta\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})\equiv\ell(%
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)})-\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
roman_О” roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) вүЎ roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) - roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
will vary around zero. Since we are unable to compute the marginal likelihood under missingness, this difference is instead estimated using
в„“
c
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
вӢ…
\ell^{c}(\cdot)
roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( вӢ… )
. To this end, the auxiliary draws obtained in the E-step are retained and
О”
вҒў
в„“
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
О”
в„“
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\Delta\ell(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
roman_О” roman_в„“ ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
is estimated as
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
=
1
M
вҒў
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
log
вҒЎ
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
j
|
рқң·
(
r
)
)
вҲ’
1
M
вҒў
вҲ‘
j
=
1
M
log
вҒЎ
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
j
|
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
,
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
1
рқ‘Җ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
рқ‘Җ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘—
1
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})=%
\frac{1}{M}\sum_{j=1}^{M}\log p({\underline{\pi}}_{j}|\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)}%
)-\frac{1}{M}\sum_{j=1}^{M}\log p({\underline{\pi}}_{j}|\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r%
-1)}),
over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_M end_ARG вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_log italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) - divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_M end_ARG вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT roman_log italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) ,
(12)
where
ПҖ
ВҜ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
ВҜ
M
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
\underline{\pi}_{1},\ldots,\underline{\pi}_{M}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
denote
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
replications of imputed ranking trajectories and
p
(
вӢ…
|
рқң·
)
p(\cdot|\boldsymbol{\beta})
italic_p ( вӢ… | bold_italic_ОІ )
is its associate joint probability function, which depends on
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
.
Then, a possible stopping criterion around (
12
) is to assess if a confidence interval of the form
(
О·
вҲ’
L
вҒў
Пғ
,
О·
+
L
вҒў
Пғ
)
рқңӮ
рқҗҝ
рқңҺ
рқңӮ
рқҗҝ
рқңҺ
(\eta-L\sigma,\eta+L\sigma)
( italic_О· - italic_L italic_Пғ , italic_О· + italic_L italic_Пғ )
contains zero, where
О·
рқңӮ
\eta
italic_О·
and
Пғ
2
superscript
рқңҺ
2
\sigma^{2}
italic_Пғ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
are the mean and variance of
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқңё
(
r
)
,
рқңё
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқңё
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқңё
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\gamma}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\gamma}^{(r-1)})
over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_Оі start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_Оі start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
, and
L
рқҗҝ
L
italic_L
is a non-negative constant to be specified. These unknown quantities are obtained by estimating
О·
рқңӮ
\eta
italic_О·
with Equation (
12
), and
Пғ
^
2
superscript
^
рқңҺ
2
\widehat{\sigma}^{2}
over^ start_ARG italic_Пғ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
with the empirical variance of
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
1
|
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
1
|
рқң·
(
r
)
)
,
вҖҰ
,
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
M
|
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
M
|
рқң·
(
r
)
)
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
1
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
1
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
вҖҰ
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
\dfrac{p({\underline{\pi}}_{1}|\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})}{p({\underline{\pi}%
}_{1}|\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)})},\ldots,\dfrac{p({\underline{\pi}}_{M}|%
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})}{p({\underline{\pi}}_{M}|\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)})}
divide start_ARG italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) end_ARG , вҖҰ , divide start_ARG italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_p ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) end_ARG
.
Chan and Ledolter
(
1995
)
suggest
L
рқҗҝ
L
italic_L
be a number such as 4, in such a way that ChebychevвҖҷs inequality guarantees that with a probability of at least
100
вҒў
(
1
вҲ’
1
/
L
2
)
%
100
percent
1
1
superscript
рқҗҝ
2
100(1-1/L^{2})\%
100 ( 1 - 1 / italic_L start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) %
, the true difference lies within the interval. For further details, please refer to Section 2.3 from
Chan and Ledolter
(
1995
)
. Another option is to create the interval based on the Central Limit Theorem and adopt a standard normal quantile in place of
L
рқҗҝ
L
italic_L
.
Finally, convergence is accepted if the interval contains zero and
Пғ
<
Пө
рқңҺ
italic-Пө
\sigma<\epsilon
italic_Пғ < italic_Пө
, guaranteeing that
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
is estimated with minimum precision
Пө
>
0
italic-Пө
0
\epsilon>0
italic_Пө > 0
. The latter effectively determines the sample size
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
, and the algorithm stops when
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
is within
2
вҒў
L
вҒў
Пғ
2
рқҗҝ
рқңҺ
2L\sigma
2 italic_L italic_Пғ
of zero. To satisfy this condition and optimise efficiency, we adopt the strategy of starting with moderate
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
and increasing this value along with the algorithmвҖҷs iterations.
This concludes our algorithm specification, for which pseudo-code is given in Algorithm
2
, which iterates between a Monte Carlo E-Step, maximisation of the estimated
Q
рқ‘„
Q
italic_Q
-function, and a convergence assessment based on a prespecified precision
Пө
>
0
italic-Пө
0
\epsilon>0
italic_Пө > 0
and the estimated confidence interval for
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
.
Input:
Observed incomplete data
ПҖ
ВҜ
~
~
ВҜ
рқңӢ
\tilde{{\underline{\pi}}}
over~ start_ARG underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG end_ARG
,
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
,
Пө
italic-Пө
\epsilon
italic_Пө
,
L
рқҗҝ
L
italic_L
and initial guess
рқң·
(
0
)
superscript
рқң·
0
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(0)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( 0 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
;
Let
рқ’®
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
)
рқ’®
ВҜ
рқңӢ
\mathcal{S}({\underline{{\pi}}})
caligraphic_S ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG )
be the set of rows where
(
ПҖ
t
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
max
вҒЎ
(
p
,
q
)
вҲ’
1
)
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
1
(\pi_{t},\ldots,\pi_{t-\max(p,q)-1})
( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - roman_max ( italic_p , italic_q ) - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
involves missingness;
c
вҶҗ
FALSE
вҶҗ
рқ‘җ
FALSE
c\leftarrow\mbox{FALSE}
italic_c вҶҗ FALSE
;
r
вҶҗ
0
вҶҗ
рқ‘ҹ
0
r\leftarrow 0
italic_r вҶҗ 0
;
while
c
=
FALSE
рқ‘җ
FALSE
c=\mbox{FALSE}
italic_c = FALSE
do
//
1. Monte Carlo Expectation Step
for
j
вҲҲ
рқ’®
вҒў
(
ПҖ
ВҜ
)
рқ‘—
рқ’®
ВҜ
рқңӢ
j\in\mathcal{S}({\underline{\pi}})
italic_j вҲҲ caligraphic_S ( underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG )
do
Sample
рққ…
j
вүЎ
ПҖ
~
j
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
~
j
M
subscript
рққ…
рқ‘—
subscript
superscript
~
рқңӢ
1
рқ‘—
вҖҰ
subscript
superscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘—
\boldsymbol{\pi}_{j}\equiv\widetilde{\pi}^{1}_{j},\ldots,\widetilde{\pi}^{M}_{j}
bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
from
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
j
)
вүЎ
Uniform
вҒў
(
в„ӣ
вҒў
(
ПҖ
~
j
)
)
рқ‘қ
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
Uniform
в„ӣ
subscript
~
рқңӢ
рқ‘—
p(\pi_{j})\equiv\mbox{Uniform}(\mathcal{R}(\tilde{\pi}_{j}))
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) вүЎ Uniform ( caligraphic_R ( over~ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) )
;
Store
рққ…
j
subscript
рққ…
рқ‘—
\boldsymbol{{\pi}}_{j}
bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_j end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
;
end for
//
ПҖ
ВҜ
1
вүЎ
(
рққ…
1
1
,
вҖҰ
,
рққ…
N
1
)
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
ВҜ
M
вүЎ
(
рққ…
1
M
,
вҖҰ
,
рққ…
N
M
)
formulae-sequence
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
1
superscript
subscript
рққ…
1
1
вҖҰ
superscript
subscript
рққ…
рқ‘Ғ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
superscript
subscript
рққ…
1
рқ‘Җ
вҖҰ
superscript
subscript
рққ…
рқ‘Ғ
рқ‘Җ
{\underline{{\pi}}}_{1}\equiv(\boldsymbol{\pi}_{1}^{1},\ldots,\boldsymbol{\pi}%
_{N}^{1}),\ldots,{\underline{{\pi}}}_{M}\equiv(\boldsymbol{\pi}_{1}^{M},\ldots%
,\boldsymbol{\pi}_{N}^{M})
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ ( bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , вҖҰ , bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_N end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ) , вҖҰ , underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ ( bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , вҖҰ , bold_italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_N end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
complete data sets are obtained;
//
2. Maximisation Step
Maximise
Q
вҒў
(
рқң·
;
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
рқ‘„
рқң·
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
Q(\boldsymbol{\beta};\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r-1)})
italic_Q ( bold_italic_ОІ ; bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
given in Eq. (
11
) with respect to
рқң·
рқң·
\boldsymbol{\beta}
bold_italic_ОІ
;
Set
рқң·
(
r
)
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)}
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
as the solution of this maximization problem;
//
3. Convergence check
Estimate
О·
^
=
О”
^
вҒў
в„“
c
вҒў
(
рқң·
(
r
)
,
рқң·
(
r
вҲ’
1
)
)
^
рқңӮ
^
О”
superscript
в„“
рқ‘җ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
1
\widehat{\eta}=\widehat{\Delta}\ell^{c}(\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},\boldsymbol{%
\beta}^{(r-1)})
over^ start_ARG italic_О· end_ARG = over^ start_ARG roman_О” end_ARG roman_в„“ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_c end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r - 1 ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT )
and
Пғ
^
2
superscript
^
рқңҺ
2
\widehat{\sigma}^{2}
over^ start_ARG italic_Пғ end_ARG start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
using
ПҖ
ВҜ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
ВҜ
M
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
ВҜ
рқңӢ
рқ‘Җ
{\underline{{\pi}}}_{1},\ldots,{\underline{{\pi}}}_{M}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_M end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
;
Compute the interval
в„җ
=
(
О·
^
вҲ’
L
вҒў
Пғ
^
,
О·
^
+
L
вҒў
Пғ
^
)
в„җ
^
рқңӮ
рқҗҝ
^
рқңҺ
^
рқңӮ
рқҗҝ
^
рқңҺ
\mathcal{I}=(\widehat{\eta}-L\widehat{\sigma},\widehat{\eta}+L\widehat{\sigma})
caligraphic_I = ( over^ start_ARG italic_О· end_ARG - italic_L over^ start_ARG italic_Пғ end_ARG , over^ start_ARG italic_О· end_ARG + italic_L over^ start_ARG italic_Пғ end_ARG )
;
if
Пғ
вүӨ
Пө
рқңҺ
italic-Пө
\sigma\leq\epsilon
italic_Пғ вүӨ italic_Пө
and
0
вҲҲ
в„җ
0
в„җ
0\in\mathcal{I}
0 вҲҲ caligraphic_I
then
c
=
TRUE
рқ‘җ
TRUE
c=\mbox{TRUE}
italic_c = TRUE
convergence indicator
else if
Пғ
^
>
Пө
^
рқңҺ
italic-Пө
\hat{\sigma}>\epsilon
over^ start_ARG italic_Пғ end_ARG > italic_Пө
then
M
=
M
+
вҢҲ
M
/
3
вҢү
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘Җ
3
M=M+\lceil M/3\rceil
italic_M = italic_M + вҢҲ italic_M / 3 вҢү
r
=
r
+
1
;
рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘ҹ
1
r=r+1;
italic_r = italic_r + 1 ;
end if
else
r
=
r
+
1
;
рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘ҹ
1
r=r+1;
italic_r = italic_r + 1 ;
end if
end while
Output:
рқң·
(
r
)
,
M
,
r
superscript
рқң·
рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘Җ
рқ‘ҹ
\boldsymbol{\beta}^{(r)},M,r
bold_italic_ОІ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_r ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT , italic_M , italic_r
;
AlgorithmВ 2
Monte Carlo EM algorithm to fit the R-GARCH model parameters under incomplete ranking trajectories.
4.2
MCEM Simulation Study
A small simulation experiment is carried out to investigate the performance of the proposed inferential procedure for incomplete rankings. For this purpose, ranking time series data will be simulated from the R-GARCH model with different percentages of missingness. We set the data configuration to
k
=
10
,
n
=
500
,
П•
0
=
3
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
10
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ӣ
500
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
k=10,n=500,\phi_{0}=3
italic_k = 10 , italic_n = 500 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3
and
П•
1
=
0.5
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.5
\phi_{1}=0.5
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.5
. Either 10% or 30% of missing entries are then introduced uniformly at random in the simulated data set as follows. First, a row index
t
вҲ—
superscript
рқ‘Ў
t^{*}
italic_t start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
is drawn from
{
1
,
вҖҰ
,
n
}
1
вҖҰ
рқ‘ӣ
\{1,\ldots,n\}
{ 1 , вҖҰ , italic_n }
. The number of rankings to be deleted from
ПҖ
t
вҲ—
subscript
рқңӢ
superscript
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t^{*}}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is then simulated between
{
2
,
вҖҰ
,
k
/
2
}
2
вҖҰ
рқ‘ҳ
2
\{2,\ldots,k/2\}
{ 2 , вҖҰ , italic_k / 2 }
and the positions to be removed are chosen at random. The index
t
вҲ—
superscript
рқ‘Ў
t^{*}
italic_t start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
is excluded from the set of available rows and the procedure continues until the missingness percentage is approximately the target. The number of Monte Carlo replications is 100 per missingness percentage,
M
рқ‘Җ
M
italic_M
is initialised to 200, and
Пө
italic-Пө
\epsilon
italic_Пө
is set to 0.05.
The empirical density functions of the Monte Carlo parameter estimates are shown in Figure
6
, where different colors indicate 10% (in red) or 30% (in blue) missing entries and dashed lines indicate the parameter value used to generate the (complete) data. As expected, uncertainty increases slightly as more entries are removed. This can be seen clearly on the left-hand side, where the density associated with the 10% case is sharper at the true value of
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. In terms of the autoregressive parameter, there is a small downward bias which increases with the missingness percentage. We conjecture that this is due to the independence assumption made on the distribution of the latent complete ranks. Introducing time dependence in the latter would likely help mitigate this, but this would imply a more complicated and computationally expensive E-step. In our view, results are satisfactorily close to the true
П•
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
\phi_{1}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
, so we choose to avoid this extra hurdle. Anyway, we believe that this point deserves further investigation in a future paper.
Figure 6:
Empirical density functions of the R-GARCH(1,0) parameter estimates using simulated ranking time series data with missingness via MCEM (Algorithm
2
). One hundred data sets are simulated with
k
=
10
,
n
=
500
,
П•
0
=
3
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ҳ
10
formulae-sequence
рқ‘ӣ
500
subscript
italic-П•
0
3
k=10,n=500,\phi_{0}=3
italic_k = 10 , italic_n = 500 , italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 3
, and
П•
1
=
0.5
subscript
italic-П•
1
0.5
\phi_{1}=0.5
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = 0.5
and either 10% or 30% of random missing entries. The different colors indicate 10% (in red) or 30% (in blue) of missingness, and the true parameter values and marked with vertical dashed lines.
5
Application to Tennis Rankings
Data containing the weekly rankings of professional male singles tennis players was sourced online from
Kaggle
, originally scrapped from the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP)
website
. It contains weekly rankings of the top one hundred athletes from 1990 to 2019. Naturally, there are changes in players entering or exiting the rankings across this period, with the total number of distinct individuals that appear at least once in the data being 718. To achieve some homogeneity of the player set, we decide to filter the data to the 2015-2019 period. This is done so that the effect of players disappearing from the ranking due to retirement, or emerging from having recently joined the sport competitively is reduced. This subset involves
n
=
172
рқ‘ӣ
172
n=172
italic_n = 172
rankings and 202 players.
Our first aim is to analyse the evolution of players who were ranked in all 172 weeks, a subset of
k
=
31
рқ‘ҳ
31
k=31
italic_k = 31
individuals. To this end, the relative ranking of such athletes is computed and our observed data becomes
ПҖ
ВҜ
вүЎ
(
ПҖ
1
,
вҖҰ
,
ПҖ
172
)
ВҜ
рқңӢ
subscript
рқңӢ
1
вҖҰ
subscript
рқңӢ
172
{\underline{\pi}}\equiv(\pi_{1},\ldots,\pi_{172})
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG вүЎ ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , вҖҰ , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 172 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, where
ПҖ
i
вҲҲ
рқ’«
31
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘–
subscript
рқ’«
31
\pi_{i}\in\mathcal{P}_{31}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_i end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 31 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. Inferential procedures proposed for complete ranking time series in Section
3
are applied to
ПҖ
ВҜ
ВҜ
рқңӢ
{\underline{\pi}}
underВҜ start_ARG italic_ПҖ end_ARG
under different values of
p
рқ‘қ
p
italic_p
and
q
рқ‘һ
q
italic_q
. The R-GARCH model is fitted to different combinations of
p
,
q
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
p,q
italic_p , italic_q
, with the Hamming and Kendall distances. AIC and BIC are computed to perform order selection within the Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH models. We highlight that it is not sensible to perform distance selection under model information criteria because the R-GARCH can be written in terms of the distance trajectory and this changes according to the metric. The empirical autocorrelation function (ACF) and partial autocorrelation function (PACF) of the latter are displayed in Figure
7
, which gives us an idea about the order to be considered. For both the Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH models, we fit combinations of
p
,
q
вҲҲ
{
0
,
вҖҰ
,
3
}
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
0
вҖҰ
3
p,q\in\{0,\ldots,3\}
italic_p , italic_q вҲҲ { 0 , вҖҰ , 3 }
, and compute AIC and BIC. The order
(
p
,
q
)
=
(
3
,
0
)
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
3
0
(p,q)=(3,0)
( italic_p , italic_q ) = ( 3 , 0 )
is selected for both Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH models, based on either AIC or BIC.
Figure 7:
Autocorrelation function (ACF) and partial autocorrelation function (PACF) of the lag-one Kendall and Hamming distance trajectories
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
,
t
=
2
,
вҖҰ
,
172
formulae-sequence
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘Ў
2
вҖҰ
172
d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1}),t=2,\ldots,172
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) , italic_t = 2 , вҖҰ , 172
, computed for the tennis rankings data.
The models indicated by AIC and BIC are further inspected in Table
3
, which contains the MLEs and their standard errors.
An analysis of residuals is employed to compare the Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH(3,0) models. To this end, their fitted mean trajectories
{
Ој
^
t
}
t
=
2
172
superscript
subscript
subscript
^
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў
2
172
\{\hat{\mu}_{t}\}_{t=2}^{172}
{ over^ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t = 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT 172 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
are obtained and these are used to compute the ordinary residuals
r
^
t
=
d
(
ПҖ
t
,
ПҖ
t
вҲ’
1
)
вҲ’
Ој
^
t
)
\hat{r}_{t}=d(\pi_{t},\pi_{t-1})-\hat{\mu}_{t})
over^ start_ARG italic_r end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t - 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) - over^ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
, for
t
=
5
,
вҖҰ
,
172
рқ‘Ў
5
вҖҰ
172
t=5,\dots,172
italic_t = 5 , вҖҰ , 172
. Figure
8
displays the boxplot and ACF of
r
^
t
subscript
^
рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘Ў
\hat{r}_{t}
over^ start_ARG italic_r end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
computed from the models under comparison. To produce the boxplots on the left, the Hamming residuals are scaled to match the range of the Kendall ones. This is done by multiplying
r
^
t
subscript
^
рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘Ў
\hat{r}_{t}
over^ start_ARG italic_r end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
by the factor
(
k
2
)
/
k
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
2
рқ‘ҳ
{k\choose 2}/k
( binomial start_ARG italic_k end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG ) / italic_k
. The latter is the ratio of distancesвҖҷ maximum values, which are
(
k
2
)
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
2
{k\choose 2}
( binomial start_ARG italic_k end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG )
and
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
respectively for the Kendall and Hamming forms. Once this is done, we compare the values of ordinary residuals from the two models via boxplots. These plots indicate that smaller deviations are obtained with the Kendall distance. The ACF of residuals shows that both models have captured well the source of autocorrelation. Overall, the residual analysis supports the decision to favour the Kendall R-GARCH(3,0) model in the analysis of tennis playerвҖҷs weekly rankings.
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
П•
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
\phi_{1}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
П•
2
subscript
italic-П•
2
\phi_{2}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
П•
3
subscript
italic-П•
3
\phi_{3}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 3 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
Kendall
32.080 (2.345)
0.274 (0.021)
0.377 (0.020)
0.063 (0.018)
Hamming
6.955 (0.847)
0.070 (0.038)
0.320 (0.038)
0.061 (0.041)
Table 3:
Maximum likelihood estimates and their respective standard errors (in parentheses) of Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH(3,0) models fitted to the tennis rankings data.
Figure 8:
Residual analysis of the Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH(3,0) models fitted to the tennis rankings data.
5.1
Incomplete Tennis Ranking Analysis
In this subsection, we analyze the ten most competitive players from the 2015-2019 period. This classification is made based on the highest number of aggregate points per athlete, resulting in the set:
Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal, Roger Federer, Andy Murray, Dominic Thiem, Alexander Zverev, Marin Cilic, Kei Nishikori, Stan Wawrinka
and
Milos Raonic
. The filtered data that focuses on this set is a
172
Г—
10
172
10
172\times 10
172 Г— 10
-dimensional matrix, which is represented in Figure
9
. The heatmap in this figure illustrates the ranking trajectories attributed to each player over time. Players are represented as rows and tile shades (from green to red) indicate their ranking each week. Tiles in grey color point out missing entries which happen for
Stan Wawrinka
and
Andy Murray
in June-August 2018.
Figure 9:
Rankings from top players (rows) at each week (columns). Each cell is colored according to the respective ranking position according to the legend key shown to the right.
The inferential strategy designed to handle incomplete rankings presented in Section
4
is applied to this data. To reduce the computational burden of running the MCEM algorithm multiple times, the selection of
p
рқ‘қ
p
italic_p
and
q
рқ‘һ
q
italic_q
is made beforehand. This is done as follows. First, complete data is generated by sampling missing entries uniformly at random from the unranked set. Then, the Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH models are fitted with
p
,
q
вҲҲ
{
0
,
вҖҰ
,
3
}
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
0
вҖҰ
3
p,q\in\{0,\ldots,3\}
italic_p , italic_q вҲҲ { 0 , вҖҰ , 3 }
using standard maximum likelihood estimation. This is repeated sometimes to mitigate sampling variation, and the results point order
(
p
,
q
)
=
(
3
,
0
)
рқ‘қ
рқ‘һ
3
0
(p,q)=(3,0)
( italic_p , italic_q ) = ( 3 , 0 )
in the majority of times for both models. Parameter estimates and standard errors for the R-GARCH(3,0) models are then obtained with MCEM using
M
=
500
рқ‘Җ
500
M=500
italic_M = 500
and
Пө
=
10
вҲ’
3
italic-Пө
superscript
10
3
\epsilon=10^{-3}
italic_Пө = 10 start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT - 3 end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
. The results are displayed in Table
4
. Models are compared via analysis of residuals, which is carried out as before. Although both successfully capture the dataвҖҷs autocorrelation, smaller residuals are obtained from the Kendall fit. The latter is then selected for a predictive task that is described in what follows.
Estimate (SE)
Kendall
Hamming
П•
0
subscript
italic-П•
0
\phi_{0}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 0 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
3.700 (0.312)
3.424 (0.296)
П•
1
subscript
italic-П•
1
\phi_{1}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
0.000 (0.035)
0.000 (0.034)
П•
2
subscript
italic-П•
2
\phi_{2}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 2 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
0.198 (0.034)
0.199 (0.035)
П•
3
subscript
italic-П•
3
\phi_{3}
italic_П• start_POSTSUBSCRIPT 3 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
0.067 (0.031)
0.104 (0.032)
Table 4:
Kendall and Hamming R-GARCH(3,0) model parameter estimates and their standard errors (in parentheses) via MCEM for the top ten tennis players data.
Figure 10:
Replicated importance sampling estimates of
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
obtained under naive and designed Mallows model importance densities.
One natural point of interest is to make predictions with the fitted model. Under the R-GARCH model, it is straightforward to obtain the one-step-ahead forecast for the average distance from the current rank, i.e.
E
вҒў
[
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
,
ПҖ
t
)
|
в„ұ
t
]
рқҗё
delimited-[]
conditional
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
E[d(\pi_{t+1},\pi_{t})|\mathcal{F}_{t}]
italic_E [ italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ]
. Although this gives a sense of how close to
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
the next ranking is expected to be, it does not say much about the permutation itself. For example, one could be interested in some quantity involving the conditional distribution of
ПҖ
t
+
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t+1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
given
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
such as:
What is the probability that the top player in week
t
рқ‘Ў
t
italic_t
maintains his position in the next week?
Mathematically, this question translates as computing
pr
t
+
1
вүЎ
вҲ‘
ПҖ
t
+
1
вҲҲ
рқ’«
k
I
вҒў
{
ПҖ
t
+
1
вҒў
(
1
)
=
ПҖ
t
вҒў
(
1
)
}
вҒў
exp
вҒЎ
(
вҲ’
Оё
t
+
1
вҒў
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
,
ПҖ
t
)
)
ОЁ
вҒў
(
Оё
t
+
1
)
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
рқҗј
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
ОЁ
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}\equiv\displaystyle\sum_{\pi_{t+1}\in\mathcal{P}_{k}}I\{\pi_{t+%
1}(1)=\pi_{t}(1)\}\frac{\exp(-\theta_{t+1}d(\pi_{t+1},\pi_{t}))}{\Psi(\theta_{%
t+1})}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вүЎ вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT вҲҲ caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_I { italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) = italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) } divide start_ARG roman_exp ( - italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) ) end_ARG start_ARG roman_ОЁ ( italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG
, where
I
вҒў
{
вӢ…
}
рқҗј
вӢ…
I\{\cdot\}
italic_I { вӢ… }
is as an indicator function. We replace
Оё
t
+
1
subscript
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
\theta_{t+1}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
by its estimate derived from
Ој
^
t
+
1
subscript
^
рқңҮ
рқ‘Ў
1
\widehat{\mu}_{t+1}
over^ start_ARG italic_Ој end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
via Algorithm
1
. However, generating all possible
ПҖ
t
+
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t+1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
compatible with the condition of interest can be unfeasible depending on the value of
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
. To tackle this, an estimator of
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is designed based on Importance Sampling (IS), which will be presented in what follows.
Consider the above question of interest and
t
=
172
рқ‘Ў
172
t=172
italic_t = 172
. The player ranked first at this time was
Novak Djokovic
, and we would like to know the probability that he retains the first rank in the next classification. Under IS, an estimator of
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is constructed by sampling
ПҖ
t
+
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t+1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
from some (importance) distribution, say
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
. The IS estimator based on
L
рқҗҝ
L
italic_L
samples from
G
рқҗә
G
italic_G
, say
{
ПҖ
(
l
)
}
l
=
1
L
superscript
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘ҷ
1
рқҗҝ
\{\pi^{(l)}\}_{l=1}^{L}
{ italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT } start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_L end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT
, is given by
pr
^
t
+
1
=
1
L
вҒў
вҲ‘
l
=
1
L
h
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
)
вҒў
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
|
в„ұ
t
,
Оё
^
t
+
1
)
g
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
)
,
subscript
^
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
1
рқҗҝ
superscript
subscript
рқ‘ҷ
1
рқҗҝ
в„Һ
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
рқ‘қ
conditional
superscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘ҷ
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘”
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
\displaystyle\widehat{\mbox{pr}}_{t+1}=\frac{1}{L}\sum_{l=1}^{L}h(\pi^{(l)}_{t%
+1}(1))\frac{p(\pi_{t+1}^{(l)}|\mathcal{F}_{t},\widehat{\theta}_{t+1})}{g(\pi^%
{(l)}_{t+1})},
over^ start_ARG pr end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT = divide start_ARG 1 end_ARG start_ARG italic_L end_ARG вҲ‘ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_l = 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_L end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT italic_h ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) ) divide start_ARG italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG start_ARG italic_g ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) end_ARG ,
(13)
where
h
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
)
в„Һ
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
h(\pi^{(l)}_{t+1}(1))
italic_h ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) )
is a function of
ПҖ
t
+
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t+1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
; for our purpose,
h
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
)
=
I
вҒў
{
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
=
ПҖ
t
вҒў
(
1
)
}
в„Һ
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
рқҗј
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
h(\pi^{(l)}_{t+1}(1))=I\{\pi^{(l)}_{t+1}(1)=\pi_{t}(1)\}
italic_h ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) ) = italic_I { italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) = italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) }
. Well-known features of IS are that the estimator is unbiased and its variability depends crucially on the importance density. To reduce the variance, we would like to simulate from a distribution that is proportional to
h
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
)
вҒў
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
|
в„ұ
t
,
Оё
^
t
+
1
)
в„Һ
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘қ
conditional
superscript
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
рқ‘ҷ
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
h(\pi^{(l)}_{t+1})p(\pi_{t+1}^{(l)}|\mathcal{F}_{t},\widehat{\theta}_{t+1})
italic_h ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ) italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
such that
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
is high when
h
(
вӢ…
)
p
(
вӢ…
|
в„ұ
t
,
Оё
^
t
+
1
)
h(\cdot)p(\cdot|\mathcal{F}_{t},\widehat{\theta}_{t+1})
italic_h ( вӢ… ) italic_p ( вӢ… | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
is high. Evidently, the first step in this direction is to fix
I
вҒў
{
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
=
ПҖ
t
вҒў
(
1
)
}
=
1
рқҗј
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
I\{\pi^{(l)}_{t+1}(1)=\pi_{t}(1)\}=1
italic_I { italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) = italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) } = 1
. Next, observe that
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
|
в„ұ
t
,
Оё
^
t
+
1
)
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
p(\pi_{t+1}|\mathcal{F}_{t},\widehat{\theta}_{t+1})
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
places high weight at rankings
ПҖ
t
+
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
\pi_{t+1}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
that make
d
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
,
ПҖ
t
)
рқ‘‘
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
d(\pi_{t+1},\pi_{t})
italic_d ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
low. Hence, a good importance distribution is a Mallows model with mode
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
. We can also make the spread parameter of this Mallows importance density similar to that of
p
вҒў
(
ПҖ
t
+
1
|
в„ұ
t
,
Оё
^
t
+
1
)
рқ‘қ
conditional
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
subscript
в„ұ
рқ‘Ў
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
p(\pi_{t+1}|\mathcal{F}_{t},\widehat{\theta}_{t+1})
italic_p ( italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT | caligraphic_F start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT , over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT )
by вҖҳtranslatingвҖҷ
Оё
^
t
+
1
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
\widehat{\theta}_{t+1}
over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
to the
k
вҲ’
k
в„җ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқ‘ҳ
в„җ
k-k_{\mathcal{I}}
italic_k - italic_k start_POSTSUBSCRIPT caligraphic_I end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
setting, where
k
в„җ
subscript
рқ‘ҳ
в„җ
k_{\mathcal{I}}
italic_k start_POSTSUBSCRIPT caligraphic_I end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is the number of positions fixed under
I
вҒў
{
вӢ…
}
рқҗј
вӢ…
I\{\cdot\}
italic_I { вӢ… }
. Based on these ideas, our
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
choice is a Mallows distribution with mode given by the relabel of the unfixed
ПҖ
t
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
\pi_{t}
italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and spread
Оё
вҲ—
=
Оё
^
t
+
1
вҒў
(
k
вҲ’
k
в„җ
2
)
/
(
k
2
)
superscript
рқңғ
subscript
^
рқңғ
рқ‘Ў
1
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқ‘ҳ
в„җ
2
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
2
\theta^{*}=\widehat{\theta}_{t+1}{k-k_{\mathcal{I}}\choose 2}/{k\choose 2}
italic_Оё start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT вҲ— end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT = over^ start_ARG italic_Оё end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( binomial start_ARG italic_k - italic_k start_POSTSUBSCRIPT caligraphic_I end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG ) / ( binomial start_ARG italic_k end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG )
where
(
k
вҲ’
k
в„җ
2
)
/
(
k
2
)
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқ‘ҳ
в„җ
2
binomial
рқ‘ҳ
2
{k-k_{\mathcal{I}}\choose 2}/{k\choose 2}
( binomial start_ARG italic_k - italic_k start_POSTSUBSCRIPT caligraphic_I end_POSTSUBSCRIPT end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG ) / ( binomial start_ARG italic_k end_ARG start_ARG 2 end_ARG )
is the ratio of maximum disagreements under
k
вҲ’
k
в„җ
рқ‘ҳ
subscript
рқ‘ҳ
в„җ
k-k_{\mathcal{I}}
italic_k - italic_k start_POSTSUBSCRIPT caligraphic_I end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
and
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
.
To demonstrate that this strategy is effective and achieved low IS variability, we provide its comparison to a naive
g
вҒў
(
вӢ…
)
рқ‘”
вӢ…
g(\cdot)
italic_g ( вӢ… )
choice. The latter consists of simply fixing
I
вҒў
{
ПҖ
t
+
1
(
l
)
вҒў
(
1
)
=
ПҖ
t
вҒў
(
1
)
}
=
1
рқҗј
subscript
superscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘ҷ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
subscript
рқңӢ
рқ‘Ў
1
1
I\{\pi^{(l)}_{t+1}(1)=\pi_{t}(1)\}=1
italic_I { italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUPERSCRIPT ( italic_l ) end_POSTSUPERSCRIPT start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) = italic_ПҖ start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t end_POSTSUBSCRIPT ( 1 ) } = 1
and sampling all the remaining items uniformly at random, hence
g
вҒў
(
ПҖ
)
=
1
/
(
k
вҲ’
1
)
!
рқ‘”
рқңӢ
1
рқ‘ҳ
1
g(\pi)=1/(k-1)!
italic_g ( italic_ПҖ ) = 1 / ( italic_k - 1 ) !
. The alternative estimators of
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
are compared by gathering 10K replications of each, setting
L
=
500
рқҗҝ
500
L=500
italic_L = 500
in both. Results are displayed in Figure
10
via histograms. Given that
k
=
10
рқ‘ҳ
10
k=10
italic_k = 10
, it is possible to compute
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
exactly for this application and compare the estimates with the exact probability. This is marked with a vertical dashed line and displayed on the top-left corner alongside the average
pr
^
t
+
1
subscript
^
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\widehat{\mbox{pr}}_{t+1}
over^ start_ARG pr end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
per method. As expected, the empirical mean of
pr
^
t
+
1
subscript
^
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\widehat{\mbox{pr}}_{t+1}
over^ start_ARG pr end_ARG start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is close to the exact probability under both estimation procedures, which follows from an IS property. However, the variance decrease is drastic under the well-designed importance density. Having considered a case where
pr
t
+
1
subscript
pr
рқ‘Ў
1
\mbox{pr}_{t+1}
pr start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_t + 1 end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
is tractable allowed us to check and validate the proposed approach. The designed IS algorithm makes it possible to make predictions on the rankings space when
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
is moderate or large.
6
Conclusions
This paper presents a novel approach for modelling ranking time series data. Our formulation integrated two widespread methods within the rankings and time series literature: the Mallows model (MM) and the GARCH approach. This integration, denoted by R-GARCH models, was achieved via a reparameterisation of the Mallows distribution where autoregressive and feedback components were incorporated through its conditional mean. Theoretical and computational methods concerning the R-GARCH models were carefully developed. Stationarity and ergodicity properties of the process were established. Parameter estimation was addressed for both complete and incomplete rankings, using maximum likelihood estimation and a Monte Carlo EM algorithm, respectively. These inferential methods were validated via simulation studies and later applied to tennis ranking time series data. Specifically, we focused on the weekly rankings of professional male tennis players where model selection, diagnostic tools, and prediction were considered. To carry out predictions in the permutation space, an importance sampling (IS) technique was introduced. With the design of an effective importance density, our algorithm extended prediction on
рқ’«
k
subscript
рқ’«
рқ‘ҳ
\mathcal{P}_{k}
caligraphic_P start_POSTSUBSCRIPT italic_k end_POSTSUBSCRIPT
to moderate or large
k
рқ‘ҳ
k
italic_k
number of individuals/items.
Finally, some points of future research that deserve attention are the following. Inference for the R-GARCH models under distances with non-analytical forms of either (or both) expected value and normalisation constant is a challenging point. This may require computationally intensive methods, particularly in root-solving algorithms and intractable inference procedures. In another vein, for applications where additional information is available, a natural goal is the incorporation of exogenous variables.
References
(1)
Asfaw et al. (2017)
Asfaw, D., Vitelli, V., SГёrensen, Гҳ., Arjas, E. & Frigessi, A.
(2017).
Time-varying rankings with the Bayesian Mallows model.
Stat
.
6
, 14вҖ“30.
Brockwell and Davis (1991)
Brockwell, P.J. & Davis, R.A.
(1991).
Time Series: Theory and Methods.
Springer.
Bollerslev (1986)
Bollerslev, T.
(1986).
Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity.
Journal of Econometrics
.
31
, 307вҖ“327.
Chan and Ledolter (1995)
Chan, K.S. & Ledolter, J.
(1995).
Monte Carlo EM estimation for time series models involving counts.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
.
90
, 242вҖ“252.
Creal et al. (2013)
Creal, D., Koopman, S.J. & Lucas, A.
(2013).
Generalized autoregressive score models with applications.
Journal of Applied Econometrics
.
28
, 777вҖ“795.
Crispino et al. (2017)
Crispino, M, Arjas, E., Vitelli, V., Barrett, N. & Frigessi, A.
(2017).
A Bayesian Mallows approach to non-transitive pair comparison data: How human are sounds?
The Annals of Applied Statistics
.
13
, 492вҖ“519.
Crispino et al. (2023)
Crispino, M., Mollica, C., Astuti, V. & Tardella, L.
(2023).
Efficient and accurate inference for mixtures of Mallows models with Spearman distance.
Statistics and Computing
.
33
(98).
Critchlow (1985)
Critchlow, D.
(1985).
Metric Methods for Analyzing Partially Ranked Data.
New York: Springer Verlag.
Diaconis (1988)
Diaconis, P.
(1988).
Group Representations in Probability and Statistics.
Lecture Notes-Monograph Series.
11
, 1вҖ“192.
Engle (1982)
Engle, R.F.
(1982).
Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United Kingdom inflation.
Econometrica
.
50
, 987вҖ“1007.
Ferland et al. (2006)
Ferland, R., Latour, A. & Oraichi, D.
(2006).
Integer-valued GARCH process.
Journal of Time Series Analysis
.
27
, 923вҖ“942.
Fligner and Verducci (1986)
Fligner, M.A. & Verducci, J.S.
(1986).
Distance based ranking models.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society - Series B
.
48
, 359вҖ“369.
GonГ§alves and White (2005)
GonГ§alves, S. & White, H.
(2005).
Bootstrap standard error estimates for linear regression.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
.
100
, 970вҖ“979.
HolГҪ and Zouhar (2022)
HolГҪ, V. & Zouhar, J.
(2022).
Modelling time-varying rankings with autoregressive and score-driven dynamics.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society - Series C
.
71
, 1427вҖ“1450.
Irurozki et al. (2018)
Irurozki, E., Calvo, B. & Lozano, J.A.
(2018).
Sampling and learning Mallows and generalized Mallows models under the Cayley distance.
Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability
.
20
, 1вҖ“35.
Irurozki et al. (2019)
Irurozki, E., Calvo, B. & Lozano, J.A.
(2019).
Mallows and generalized Mallows model for matchings.
Bernoulli
.
25
, 1160вҖ“1188.
Levine and Casella (2001)
Levine, R.A. & Casella, G.
(2001).
Implementations of the Monte Carlo EM algorithm.
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics
.
10
, 422вҖ“439.
Li et al. (2019)
Li, H., Xu, M., Liu, J.S. & Fan, X.
(2019).
An extended Mallows model for ranked data aggregation.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
.
115
, 730вҖ“746.
Mallows (1957)
Mallows, C.L.
(1957).
Non-null ranking models.
Biometrika
.
44
, 114вҖ“130.
Marden (1995)
Marden, J.
(1995).
Analyzing and Modeling Rank Data.
Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Meila and Bao (2010)
MeilДғ, M. & Bao, L.
(2010).
An exponential model for infinite rankings.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
.
11
, 3481вҖ“3518.
Meyn and Tweedie (1993)
Meyn, S.P. & Tweedie, R.L.
(1993).
Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability.
London: Springer.
Plackett (1975)
Plackett, R.L.
(1975).
The analysis of permutations.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society - Series C
.
24
, 193вҖ“202.
Rydberg and Shephard (1999)
Rydberg, T.H. & Shephard, N.
(1999).
BIN models for trade-by-trade data. Modelling the number of trades in a fixed interval of time.
Working paper, Nuffield College, Oxford.
SГёrensen et al. (2020)
SГёrensen, Гҳ., Crispino M., Liu Q. & Vitelli V.
(2020).
BayesMallows: An R package for the Bayesian Mallows model.
The R Journal
.
12
, 324вҖ“342.
Vitelli et al. (2018)
Vitelli, V., SГёrensen, Гҳ., Crispino, M., Frigessi, A. & Arjas, E.
(2018).
Probabilistic preference learning with the Mallows rank model.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
.
18
, 1вҖ“49.
Wei and Tanner (1990)
Wei, C.G. & Tanner, M.A.
(1990).
A Monte Carlo implementation of the EM algorithm and the poor manвҖҷs data augmentation algorithms.
Journal of the American Statistical Association
.
85
, 699вҖ“704.
(29)
Generated  on Fri Feb  7 17:19:57 2025 by
L
a
T
e
XML