Filter then Attend: Improving attention-based Time Series Forecasting with Spectral Filtering
1
Introduction
2
Related Work and Motivations
2.1
Transformer-Based Architectures
2.2
Frequency Learning in Time Series Forecasting
3
Preliminaries
4
Methods
4.1
Architecture
4.1.1
Input Embedding
4.1.2
Spectral Block
4.1.3
Attention Block
5
Experiments
5.0.1
Baselines
5.0.2
Implementation Details
5.0.3
Main Results
5.1
Model Analysis
5.1.1
Extending Lookback Length
5.1.2
Visualization of Predictions
5.1.3
Model Efficiency
5.1.4
The Effect of Frequency Filters
6
Ablation Studies
6.0.1
Varying the Number of Layers
6.0.2
Varying the Number of Filters
6.0.3
Placing the Filter before Patching and Embedding
7
Conclusions
8
Acknowledgments
Filter then Attend: Improving attention-based Time Series Forecasting with Spectral Filtering
Elisha Dayag
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
edayag@uci.edu
&ŌĆģNhat Thanh Van Tran
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
nhatt@uci.edu
\AND
Jack Xin
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
jxin@math.uci.edu
Use footnote for providing further
information about author (webpage, alternative
address)ŌĆö
not
for acknowledging funding agencies.
Abstract
Transformer-based models are at the forefront in long time-series forecasting (LTSF). While in many cases, these models are able to achieve state of the art results, they suffer from a bias toward low-frequencies in the data and high computational and memory requirements. Recent work has established that learnable frequency filters can be an integral part of a deep forecasting model by enhancing the modelŌĆÖs spectral utilization. These works choose to use a multilayer perceptron to process their filtered signals and thus do not solve the issues found with transformer-based models. In this paper, we establish that adding a filter to the beginning of transformer-based models enhances their performance in long time-series forecasting. We add learnable filters, which only add an additional
Ōēł
1000
\approx 1000
parameters to several transformer-based models and observe in multiple instances 5-10 % relative improvement in forecasting performance. Additionally, we find that with filters added, we are able to decrease the embedding dimension of our models, resulting in transformer-based architectures that are both smaller and more effective than their non-filtering base models. We also conduct synthetic experiments to analyze how the filters enable Transformer-based models to better utilize the full spectrum for forecasting.
Keywords
Machine Learning
Ōŗģ
\cdot
Time Series Forecasting
1
Introduction
Time series forecasting is a critical task in domains such as energy usage
Maleki et┬Āal. (
2024
)
, traffic prediction
Van Der┬ĀBijl et┬Āal. (
2022
)
and financial markets
Gajamannage et┬Āal. (
2023
)
. Given the resounding success of deep learning in the adjacent fields of computer vision and natural language processing, there has been much interest in applying deep learning to time series forecasting. While some applications of deep learning to the forecasting problem utilized architectures such as the LSTM
Kong et┬Āal. (
2025
)
, the GRU
Zhang et┬Āal. (
2024
)
and temporal convolution networks, over time two broad approaches to LTSF with deep learning have coalesced: multilayer perceptrons (MLP) and transformer-based methods. Naive application of the transformer for forecasting have been deemed ineffective
Zeng et┬Āal. (
2023
)
in comparison to even linear models; adapting the transformer to be amenable to time series forecasting has required a merger with the techniques of classical signal processing and forecasting. Many of these mergers incorporate information from the frequency domain to help in forecasting
Yi et┬Āal. (
2023a
)
. This is because in the frequency domain, periodicities in the data become more apparent and are easier for the model to extract. In this paper, we present a simple merger of transformer-based models with the well-established signal processing technique of frequency filtering. Building upon recent work in LTSF that learned filters are effective for time series forecasting
Yi et┬Āal. (
2024
)
and recent work in computer vision that has indicated that learned filters can enhance the performance of vision transformers
Patro et┬Āal. (
2025
)
, we demonstrate that combining frequency filters with attention-based transformers results in a model that is stronger than the sum of its parts. As proof of our findings, we present the simple baselines of FilterFormers obtained by passing our time series through a learnable filter before applying standard variants of the transformer. By filtering first, we are able to enhance the forecasting performance of our models, especially on larger datasets for longer prediction horizons, with little added computational cost (in many cases, we are able to speedup the model because we no longer need as large an embedding dimension to obtain similar or better results).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
ŌĆó
Inspired by the recent successes of learnable filters in time series forecasting and computer vision, we combine a simple learnable filter with a transformer-based architecture to create FilterFormer.
ŌĆó
We conduct experiments on a variety of datasets spanning different domains and characteristics and demonstrate that adding a learnable filter improves performance for multiple types of transformer-based forecasters.
ŌĆó
Via synthetic experiments, we provide evidence that filters improve the performance of transformer-based models by helping them capture high-frequency patterns in the data, countering the low-pass nature of transformers.
2
Related Work and Motivations
2.1
Transformer-Based Architectures
In recent years there are a variety of transformer based approaches for forecasting that we summarize here. Initial works attempted to replace vanilla attention to overcome the quadratic sequence complexity. Informer
Zhou et┬Āal. (
2021
)
uses a ProbSparse self-attention and self-attention distilling to efficiently capture the most important keys. Autoformer
Wu et┬Āal. (
2021
)
extracts seasonal and trend components of the time series and uses autocorrelation in place of self-attention. An individual time step may not possess significant semantic information, so some methods find innovation in applying the attention mechanism to things other than the pointwise time sequence.
Nie et┬Āal. (
2022
)
segments time-series into subseries-level patches which are used as the tokens for transformer. iTransformer
Liu et┬Āal. (
2023
)
embeds the raw time series of individual variates as tokens then performs self-attention to obtain multivariate correlations. Leddam
Yu et┬Āal. (
2024
)
utilizes a dual attention module consisting of channel-wise self attention and autoregressive self-attention as well as a learnable convolution kernel.
2.2
Frequency Learning in Time Series Forecasting
Spectral analysis has a long history in time series forecasting
Shumway et┬Āal. (
2000
)
. This is because time series data often contains periodic patterns which are reflected in the spectrum. Recent work has tried to combine spectral analysis with deep learning for improved forecasting.
FEDFormer
Zhou et┬Āal. (
2022
)
uses an Encoder-Decoder architecture both incorporating spectral analysis. The encoder and decoder both use the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) to transform the time signal into the frequency domain. They then randomly samples modes for computational efficiency. The encoder applies a parametrized kernel to the frequency representation to learn the dataŌĆÖs temporal patterns before the inverse discrete Fourier transform (IDFT) is applied to obtain a time signal. The decoder applies self-attention in the frequency domain.
Fredformer
Piao et┬Āal. (
2024
)
applies patching and channel wise attention in the frequency domain combined with frequency normalization techniques to force the transformer encoder to utilize low energy frequency features in the data. This is done with the intent of mitigating frequency bias in the transformer.
FreTS
Yi et┬Āal. (
2023b
)
transforms the time signal into the frequency domain using the DFT. A multilayer perceptron (MLP) is applied in the frequency domain before. FreTS also applies a similar process along the channel dimensions to obtain cross-channel dependencies.
FITS
Xu et┬Āal. (
2024
)
explores the ability of frequency learning to develop a compact baseline for time series forecasting. In this work the authors take the DFT of the signal, apply a low pass filter to it, then applies a learnable (complex) linear mapping in the frequency domain before recovering the signal using the IDFT.
Part of the innovation of FITS is applying a frequency filter to the data before the learnable mappings. Rather than using a handcrafted filter, FilterNet
Yi et┬Āal. (
2024
)
randomly initializes a learnable filter then performs multiplication with the input signal in the frequency domain. After converting back to a time signal using the IDFT, the filtered signal is processed using a MLP.
We believe that these works have demonstrated the efficacy of frequency learning as a technique in time series forecasting. Unlike some of these methods, we believe that the power of frequency filters is best utilized as a building block enabling the transformer.
3
Preliminaries
The discrete Fourier transform converts a signal
x
Ōłł
ŌäØ
N
x\in\mathbb{R}^{N}
into its frequency domain representation
x
^
Ōłł
ŌäØ
N
\hat{x}\in\mathbb{R}^{N}
x
^
n
=
Ōłæ
k
=
0
N
ŌłÆ
1
x
n
ŌĆŗ
e
ŌłÆ
i
ŌĆŗ
2
ŌĆŗ
ŽĆ
ŌĆŗ
n
ŌĆŗ
k
N
\displaystyle\hat{x}_{n}=\sum_{k=0}^{N-1}x_{n}e^{\frac{-i2\pi nk}{N}}
(1)
The DFT is Hermitian, can be performed in
O
ŌĆŗ
(
N
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
N
)
O(N\log N)
operations using the fast Fourier transform
Cooley and Tukey (
1965
)
, and is reversible; once a signal has been processed in the frequency domain, we can convert it back to the time domain using the Inverse Discrete Fourier Transform (IDFT)
x
n
=
Ōłæ
k
=
0
N
ŌłÆ
1
x
^
k
ŌĆŗ
e
i
ŌĆŗ
2
ŌĆŗ
ŽĆ
ŌĆŗ
k
ŌĆŗ
n
N
\displaystyle x_{n}=\sum_{k=0}^{N-1}\hat{x}_{k}e^{\frac{i2\pi kn}{N}}
(2)
According to the convolution theorem
Proakis (
2007
)
, the Fourier transform of the a convolution of two signals is equal to the pointwise product of their respective Fourier transforms in the frequency domain. So, we can use the DFT to create frequency filters that modify the spectral content of our signals.
A frequency filter is any system used to modify the frequency components of a signal. In this paper we consider a frequency filter
P
P
to be the Fourier transform of a fixed signal
p
Ōłł
ŌäØ
n
p\in\mathbb{R}^{n}
.
P
P
is applied to our signal
x
^
\hat{x}
via the pointwise product to produce an output signal
y
^
\hat{y}
with frequency representation
y
^
k
=
P
k
Ōŗģ
x
^
k
\hat{y}_{k}=P_{k}\cdot\hat{x}_{k}
(3)
so that
y
=
p
ŌłŚ
x
,
y=p*x,
where
p
p
is the inverse DFT of
P
P
and
ŌłŚ
*
is circular convolution. It is the norm in digital signal processing to use hand-crafted filters. In computer vision
Patro et┬Āal. (
2025
)
as well as in time series forecasting with FilterNet, data-driven learnable filters have also been shown to be effective for tasks like classification and forecasting. In the former, it was shown that using learned frequency filters before applying a vision transformer (i.e. self-attention applied to patches) outperformed attention-only and spectral-mixing only approaches on image classification. We show that a similar truth holds for time series forecasting.
4
Methods
In our experiments, we are given a historical time series with lookback length
L
L
, where each timestamp has
D
D
variates:
X
=
{
X
1
,
ŌĆ”
,
X
L
}
Ōłł
ŌäØ
D
├Ś
L
X=\{X_{1},\dots,X_{L}\}\in\mathbb{R}^{D\times L}
. Our problem is to predict the next
H
H
timesteps, denoted by
{
X
L
+
1
,
ŌĆ”
,
X
L
+
H
}
Ōłł
ŌäØ
D
├Ś
H
\{X_{L+1},\dots,X_{L+H}\}\in\mathbb{R}^{D\times H}
.
4.1
Architecture
In our work, we also attach learnable filters to the architectures of PatchTST, iTransformer and Leddam giving us FilterFormer, iFilterFormer, and FilterLeddam respectively. For the purposes of having a simpler model to ablate with and examine, we detail the construction of FilterFormer and use it for many of our experiments. As a demonstration of the combined power of filtering and attention, we present a simple model combining both spectral and attention blocks to learn periodic and aperiodic representations of our signal.
Figure 1:
The designs of our spectral block and our attention block.
4.1.1
Input Embedding
We start by converting our signal
X
X
into a series of patches. Following the framework of PatchTST, we treat our signal as
D
D
independent univariate time series. We denote the ith series as
X
(
i
)
Ōłł
ŌäØ
L
X^{(i)}\in\mathbb{R}^{L}
.
X
(
i
)
X^{(i)}
is normalized to have zero mean and unit variance via reversible instance normalization
Kim et┬Āal. (
2021
)
. We then divide
X
(
i
)
X^{(i)}
into a sequence of consecutive overlapping or non-overlapping patches. Given a patch size
P
P
, the total number of patches is
N
=
ŌīŖ
L
ŌłÆ
P
Ōīŗ
P
+
1
.
N=\frac{\lfloor L-P\rfloor}{P}+1.
By turning our sequence into patches we are able to reduce our computational burden, allowing us to work with full self-attention later on, and we can aggregate local information into each patch, giving each spot into our self-attention more semantic meaning. After patchifying our sequence, we embed each patch
X
p
(
i
)
Ōłł
ŌäØ
P
├Ś
L
P
X_{p}^{(i)}\in\mathbb{R}^{P\times L_{P}}
into a latent space representation
Y
p
(
i
)
Ōłł
ŌäØ
P
├Ś
d
m
Y_{p}^{(i)}\in\mathbb{R}^{P\times d_{m}}
using a learnable linear layer. We enhance each latent space representation by adding a positional embedding.
4.1.2
Spectral Block
The goal of the spectral block is to capture the different frequency components of the sequence to help model temporal dependencies in the data. After performing batch normalization
Ioffe and Szegedy (
2015
)
we pass the signal through our spectral gating network. For a given embedded patch
Y
(
i
)
Y^{(i)}
(denoted as
Y
Y
from hereon) and its frequency domain representation
Y
^
\hat{Y}
, our spectral gating in the frequency domain can be expressed as a global convolution in the time domain. To realize our filter, we take the rFFT of an initially random set of real parameters which we denote by
W
W
. We then perform pointwise multiplication in the frequency domain before reverting our filtered signal back into the time domain using the IDFT. As an aside, because both our signal and the time representation of our filter are real-valued, we can be assured that their product is also the DFT of a real-valued
Figure 2:
The general form of all the FilterFormer models created in our paper.
signal given that it has the same conjugate symmetry:
W
ŌĆŗ
[
k
]
ŌĆŗ
Y
ŌĆŗ
[
k
]
┬»
\displaystyle\overline{W[k]Y[k]}
=
W
ŌĆŗ
[
k
]
┬»
Ōŗģ
Y
ŌĆŗ
[
k
]
┬»
\displaystyle=\overline{W[k]}\cdot\overline{Y[k]}
=
W
ŌĆŗ
[
ŌłÆ
k
]
Ōŗģ
Y
ŌĆŗ
[
ŌłÆ
k
]
.
\displaystyle=W[-k]\cdot Y[-k].
Thus, when we take the IDFT of our product, we are sure to obtain a real-valued signal again. The total operation of our spectral block can be written as:
Ōä▒
ŌłÆ
1
ŌĆŗ
(
Ōä▒
ŌĆŗ
(
W
)
Ōŗģ
Ōä▒
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
)
)
=
Ōä▒
ŌłÆ
1
ŌĆŗ
(
Ōä▒
ŌĆŗ
(
W
ŌłŚ
Y
)
)
\displaystyle\mathcal{F}^{-1}(\mathcal{F}(W)\cdot\mathcal{F}(Y))=\mathcal{F}^{-1}(\mathcal{F}(W*Y))
(4)
where * denotes circular convolution, and
Ōä▒
\mathcal{F}
denotes the DFT. After filtering our signal using the spectral gating network, we perform instance normalization once again before passing it through an MLP to further extract a frequency representation of our signal. We note that our spectral block is similar to FilterNet. The primary differences are that 1) we are passing an embedded version of patches of our signal through our filters and 2) because we are passing our filtered signal into a transformer, we find it is not necessary to include a MLP in our spectral block as FilterNet does. While FilterNet should be lauded for its ability to extract periodic trends in the data using a relatively lightweight scheme, we believe that better forecasting can be achieved by passing the filtered signals through a self-attention mechanism. We also note that recent work has adopted more complicated mechanisms inside of the filter block
Eldele et┬Āal. (
2024
)
, but that is outside of the scope of this paper, as we are trying to demonstrate that filtering, even in its simplest form, can improve transformed-based models.
4.1.3
Attention Block
In the attention block, we opt to go with standard multi-head attention on our filtered patches. Each head
h
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
,
H
h=1,\dots,H
in multi-head attention transforms our patch
Y
p
(
i
)
Y_{p}^{(i)}
into query matrices
Q
h
(
i
)
=
(
Y
p
(
i
)
)
T
ŌĆŗ
W
h
Q
Q_{h}^{(i)}=(Y_{p}^{(i)})^{T}W_{h}^{Q}
, key matrices
K
h
(
i
)
=
(
Y
p
(
i
)
)
T
ŌĆŗ
W
h
K
K_{h}^{(i)}=(Y_{p}^{(i)})^{T}W_{h}^{K}
, and value matrices
V
h
(
i
)
=
(
Y
p
(
i
)
)
T
ŌĆŗ
W
h
V
V_{h}^{(i)}=(Y_{p}^{(i)})^{T}W_{h}^{V}
, where
W
h
Q
,
W
h
K
Ōłł
ŌäØ
d
m
├Ś
d
k
W_{h}^{Q},W_{h}^{K}\in\mathbb{R}^{d_{m}\times d_{k}}
and
W
h
V
Ōłł
ŌäØ
d
m
├Ś
d
m
W_{h}^{V}\in\mathbb{R}^{d_{m}\times d_{m}}
. After that we use the scaled dot-product to get our attention output
O
h
(
i
)
Ōłł
ŌäØ
d
k
├Ś
N
O_{h}^{(i)}\in\mathbb{R}^{d_{k}\times N}
:
(
O
h
(
i
)
)
T
=
Softmax
ŌĆŗ
(
Q
h
(
i
)
ŌĆŗ
K
h
(
i
)
T
d
k
)
ŌĆŗ
V
h
(
i
)
(O_{h}^{(i)})^{T}=\text{Softmax}\left(\frac{Q_{h}^{(i)}K_{h}^{(i)^{T}}}{\sqrt{d_{k}}}\right)V_{h}^{(i)}
Our multi-head attention block also contains batch normalization and a multilayer perceptron with residual connections to process our attention output. Afterwards, it generates the representation
z
(
i
)
Ōłł
ŌäØ
d
k
├Ś
N
z^{(i)}\in\mathbb{R}^{d_{k}\times N}
. Finally we use a flatten layer with a linear head to map our representation to the prediction result. Like PatchTST we choose to share our weights across each channel. This enables our model to stay light.
Our model has
L
L
layers in total,
╬▒
\alpha
of which are spectral blocks and
L
ŌłÆ
╬▒
L-\alpha
of which are attention blocks.
╬▒
\alpha
is a hyperparameter allowing us to decide the tradeoff between attention and spectral layers appropriate for the dataset in question. In general, for datasets with a smaller number of channels/features, we opt for a smaller number of layers to prevent overfitting. Given the nature of a frequency filter, one may question the need for multiple spectral blocks. We find that when incorporating the MLP in the spectral block, there are situations where having multiple spectral blocks is beneficial for forecasting performance (see appendix).
5
Experiments
We evaluate our model on nine popular datasets, namely the four ETT datasets (ETTm1, ETTm2, ETTh1, and ETTh2), Exchange-rate, Weather, Electricity, Solar-Energy, and Traffic. We preprocess our datasets using standard normalization methods. The ETT (Electricity Transformer Temperature) dataset contain data collected from electricity transformers every 15 minutes (in the case of ETTm1 and ETTm2) or 1 hour (in the case of ETTh1 and ETTh2) between July 2016 and July 2018. The exchange dataset contains the daily exchange rates of Singapore, Australia, British, Canada, Switzerland, China, Japan, and New Zealand ranging from 1990 to 2016. The Weather dataset
contains 21 meteorological indicators including air temperature, atmospheric pressure, and humdity. The data was collected every 10
minutes from the Weather Station of the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry in 2020. The Traffic dataset contains hourly traffic data measured by 862 sensors on San Francisco Bay area
freeways. The data, which describes lane occupancy rates (between 0 and 1) was collected from 2015 to 2017. The Electricity dataset collects the
hourly electricity consumption of 321 clients from 2012 to 2014. The Solar-energy dataset contains the solar power production records in 2006, sampled every ten minutes from 137 PV plants in the state of Alabama.
Datasets
ETTh1
ETTh2
ETTm1
ETTm2
Electricity
Weather
Traffic
Exchange
Solar-Energy
Variables
7
7
7
7
321
21
862
8
137
Timesteps
17420
17420
69680
69680
26304
52696
17544
7588
52560
Frequency
Hourly
Hourly
15min
15min
Hourly
10min
Hourly
Daily
10min
Information
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity
Electricity
Weather
Traffic
Economy
Energy
Table 1:
The details of the datasets used in our experiments.
5.0.1
Baselines
We compare our model to iTransformer
Liu et┬Āal. (
2023
)
, patchTST
Nie et┬Āal. (
2022
)
, and Leddam
Yu et┬Āal. (
2024
)
the models used as a base to construct our FilterFormers. We also compare our model to other frequency based methods like FilterNet and Fredformer as well as the baseline MLP method DLinear. For FilterNet, we are explicitly comparing to their PaiFilter, as this learnable filter is most similar in design to the one used in Filterformer. For each model we fix the lookback length to
96
96
, and present the multivariate forecasting results for the prediction horizons
H
Ōłł
{
96
,
192
,
336
,
720
}
H\in\{96,192,336,720\}
.
5.0.2
Implementation Details
Our model is implemented with Pytorch 1.12 and all experiments were conducted on a cluster of four NVIDIA RTX 2080 TiŌĆÖs. We use mean square error (MSE) as our loss function and report MAE (mean absolute error) and MSE as our evaluation metrics. For baselines, we either use their reported numbers as stated or run the relevant training scripts found on their respective codebases. FFor FilterFormer, we experimented with an embedding dimension of 128 and 256. For iFilterFormer and FilterLeddam, we performed runs with embedding dimension 128, 256, and 512. For FilterLeddam , the embedding dimension usually matched that which the authors of the base model
Yu et┬Āal. (
2024
)
specified in their uploaded code. For iFilterFormer, we generally opted for smaller embedding dimensions than the authors of iTransformer
Liu et┬Āal. (
2023
)
used in the interest of efficiency. We trained our models using the Adam
Kingma and Ba (
2014
)
optimizer for 50 epochs with an early stopping procedure if validation loss had not increased in 15 epochs (we found this early stopping length necessary for training on the solar-energy dataset, where validation loss may be unchanged for 11 epochs before decreasing). For FilterLeddam and iFilterFormer we primarily matched our conditions like learning rate, dropout, and number of attention layers to those of the base model paper. Additionally, for these models, we did not include a multilayer perceptron in the spectral block. For FilterFormer, we experimented with learning rates in
{
1
ŌĆŗ
e
ŌłÆ
4
,
5
ŌĆŗ
e
ŌłÆ
4
,
1
ŌĆŗ
e
ŌłÆ
3
}
\{1e-4,5e-4,1e-3\}
. For FilterFormer, we primarily performed runs using three attention blocks and either 1 or 2 spectral blocks. The spectral blocks for FilterFormer did include a multilayer perceptron.
Table 2:
Model Performance Comparison (MAE/MSE). Lower is better. Best and second best values in each row colored in red or blue, respectively.
FilterFormer
FilterNet
iTransformer
PatchTST
Leddam
iFilterFormer
DLinear
Fredformer
FilterLeddam
Models
Metrics
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
ETTm1
96
.318
.354
.318
.358
.334
.368
.329
.367
.329
.361
.342
.373
.344
.370
.326
.361
.327
.361
192
.361
.384
.364
.383
.377
.391
.367
.385
.369
.383
.379
.392
.379
.393
.363
.380
.364
.381
336
.385
.403
.396
.406
.426
.420
.399
.410
.394
.402
.415
.411
.410
.411
.395
.403
.393
.404
720
.450
.438
.456
.444
.491
.459
.454
.439
.460
.442
.486
.450
.473
.450
.453
.438
.462
.440
ETTm2
96
.176
.261
.174
.257
.180
.264
.175
.259
.176
.257
.185
.267
.187
.281
.177
.259
.179
.261
192
.235
.301
.240
.300
.250
.309
.241
.302
.243
.303
.243
.309
.272
.349
.243
.301
.240
.303
336
.295
.339
.297
.339
.311
.348
.305
.343
.303
.341
.310
.351
.316
.372
.302
.340
.296
.340
720
.394
.394
.392
.393
.412
.407
.402
.400
.400
.398
.403
.403
.452
.457
.397
.396
.392
.391
ETTh1
96
.373
.395
.375
.394
.386
.405
.414
.419
.377
.394
.390
.404
.383
.396
.373
.392
.383
.397
192
.425
.431
.436
.422
.441
.436
.460
.445
.424
.422
.441
.437
.433
.426
.433
.420
.433
.428
336
.460
.454
.476
.443
.487
.458
.501
.466
.459
.442
.480
.457
.479
.457
.470
.437
.464
.444
720
.469
.477
.474
.469
.491
.497
.500
.488
.463
.459
.471
.472
.517
.513
.467
.459
.465
.464
ETTh2
96
.292
.344
.292
.343
.297
.349
.302
.348
.292
.344
.306
.351
.320
.374
.293
.342
.295
.350
192
.364
.391
.369
.395
.380
.400
.388
.400
.367
.389
.374
.398
.449
.454
.371
.389
.368
.389
336
.416
.426
.420
.432
.428
.432
.426
.433
.412
.424
.416
.452
.467
.469
.382
.409
.412
.422
720
.424
.445
.430
.446
.427
.445
.431
.446
.419
.438
.420
.442
.656
.571
.415
.434
.
412
.433
ECL
96
.154
.246
.176
.264
.148
.240
.181
.270
.141
.235
.148
.241
.195
.277
.147
.241
.141
.239
192
.165
.256
.185
.270
.162
.253
.188
.274
.159
.252
.163
.289
.194
.280
.165
.258
.157
.250
336
.183
.275
.202
.286
.178
.269
.204
.293
.173
.268
.176
.300
.207
.296
.177
.273
.174
.260
720
.221
.310
.242
.319
.225
.317
.246
.324
.201
.295
.208
.305
.242
.329
.208
.304
.200
.294
Exchange
96
.085
.201
.083
.202
.086
.206
.088
.205
.086
.207
.088
.209
.085
.210
.084
.207
.084
.203
192
.186
.303
.174
.296
.177
.296
.176
.299
.175
.301
.180
.302
.178
.299
.178
.392
.175
.295
336
.329
.416
.326
.413
.331
.417
.301
.397
.325
.415
.314
.407
.298
.409
.319
.408
.306
.400
720
.835
.681
.840
.670
.847
.691
.901
.714
.831
.636
.726
.639
.861
.671
.749
.651
.801
.667
Traffic
96
.470
.293
.506
.336
.395
.268
.462
.295
.426
.376
.396
.270
.650
.397
.406
.277
.419
.277
192
.482
.298
.508
.333
.417
.276
.466
.296
.458
.289
.418
.277
.600
.372
.426
.290
.435
.288
336
.504
.301
.518
.335
.433
.283
.482
.304
.486
.297
.425
.280
.606
.374
.437
.292
.451
.297
720
.528
.312
.553
.354
.467
.302
.514
.322
.498
.313
.458
.300
.646
.395
.462
.305
.490
.314
Weather
96
.161
.205
.164
.210
.174
.214
.177
.218
.156
.202
.170
.220
.194
.248
.163
.207
.156
.201
192
.208
.248
.214
.252
.221
.254
.225
.250
.207
.250
.222
.261
.234
.290
.211
.251
.206
.248
336
.263
.288
.268
.293
.278
.296
.278
.297
.262
.291
.276
.306
.283
.335
.267
.292
.260
.289
720
.344
.338
.344
.342
.358
.347
.354
.348
.343
.343
.358
.352
.348
.385
.343
. 341
.345
.341
Solar-Energy
96
.199
.243
.283
.293
.203
.237
.234
.286
.197
.241
.198
.232
.290
.348
.185
.233
.197
.241
192
.238
.281
.321
.311
.233
.261
.267
.310
.231
.264
.232
.261
.320
.398
.227
.253
.227
.264
336
.258
.288
.369
.334
.248
.273
.290
.315
.241
.268
.248
.278
.353
.415
.246
.284
.247
.277
720
.260
.291
.373
.336
.252
.286
.289
.317
.250
.281
.252
.282
.356
.413
.247
.276
.247
.276
1st Counts
9
7
6
3
2
2
0
1
9
7
3
2
1
0
5
9
10
9
5.0.3
Main Results
From the table, we see that across a variety of datasets, our FilterFormers outperform most of our baseline models. The performance of the filtered model and the base model is highly correlated; filters are not a panacea and are ultimately limited by the forecasting power of the backbone they are attached to. We focus for a moment on our simplest model, FilterFormer. While it shows improvement over PaiFilter (FilterFormer with no attention) in general, this improvement is most apparent on the larger ECL and Solar-Energy datasets. This implies that on complex datasets, forecasting models with filters need a larger capacity than a simple MLP, which for FilterFormer comes in the form of multi-head self-attention. We note that on the traffic dataset, FilterFormer performs worse than its base model PatchTST. This occurs because some channels of the traffic dataset show a massive discrepancy between the train and test sets, leading to a large discrepancy in the Fourier spectra between testing and training (see Figure
3
).
Figure 3:
a) Channel 840 of the traffic dataset. The red line indicates the split between the training data and the validation/test data.
When we remove even one of these outliers, we see the performance of FilterFormer dramatically improve. The results of our model and some of the baselines when trained on the traffic dataset with one single channel removed are presented in Table
3
. While every model exhibits better forecasting performance on this new dataset, our FilterFormerŌĆÖs performance is now competitive with all of our baselines and is significantly more powerful than PatchTST. In light of this result, we can see that for a complex dataset adding filtering can result in improved forecasting for a transformer-based model. This also corroborates the findings of
Yi et┬Āal. (
2024
)
that filtering alone is not optimal for larger, more complex datasets.
The improvements of our three models over their not filtered counterparts can be shown in Table
4
. We see that on most datasets, adding filtering leads to improvements. While some of these improvements may seem negligible, we want to emphasize that 1) filtering imposes negligible added compute to a base model and 2) on many of these datasets, single digit improvements in relative forecasting performance are usually the result of dramatic changes in architecture and complexity. In this regard, we view filtering as a free lunch: it is a minor addition that rarely hurts performance, but it has the potential to help greatly. We spend the rest of the paper examining the structure and outputs of these filter models to better understand why they outperform their nonfiltering counterparts.
Models
FilterFormer
FilterNet
iTransformer
PatchTST
FilterLeddam
MSE
.361
.449
.359
.401
.399
Table 3:
Performance of the baseline models and our FilterFormer on the traffic dataset after the removal of channel 840. For this experiment, the prediction horizon was 720.
Dataset
FilterFormer
iFilterFormer
FilterLeddam
MSE
╬ö
%
\Delta\%
MSE
╬ö
%
\Delta\%
MSE
╬ö
%
\Delta\%
ETTm1
0.378
2.3
0.405
0.3
0.386
0.0
ETTm2
0.275
4.8
0.285
1.0
0.276
1.9
ETTh1
0.428
8.5
0.452
1.2
0.436
-1.5
ETTh2
0.374
3.2
0.372
1.0
0.371
0.6
ECL
0.180
11.7
0.173
2.5
0.168
0.5
Exchange
0.358
2.1
0.327
9.2
0.341
4.0
Traffic
0.496
-3.1
0.424
0.9
0.448
4.1
Weather
0.244
5.6
0.256
0.0
0.241
0.1
Solar-Energy
0.238
11.8
0.232
0.4
0.229
0.4
Table 4:
Model comparisons showing average MSE over all prediction lengths and percentage improvement over baseline models.
╬ö
%
\Delta\%
represents improvement over: PatchTST (FilterFormer),
iTransformer (iFilterFormer), and Leddam (FilterLeddam).
5.1
Model Analysis
5.1.1
Extending Lookback Length
Prior work indicates that one advantage of PatchTST over other transformer based forecasters is its ability to improve the quality of predictions by increasing the lookback length
Zeng et┬Āal. (
2023
)
Nie et┬Āal. (
2022
)
. We investigated whether adding spectral blocks still enhances forecasting ability when the lookback length has been increased. We tested our FilterFormer under the same conditions except for a lookback length of 336.
Dataset
FilterFormer
PatchTST
Improvement
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
ECL
0.161
.255
0.162
.254
0.1
-0.4
Traffic
0.404
0.270
.448
.277
9.8
2.8
Weather
0.225
0.263
0.229
0.265
1.8
0.8
Table 5:
Model comparisons showing average MSE over all prediction lengths and percentage improvement over PatchTST/42 when the lookback length is increased to 336.
5.1.2
Visualization of Predictions
In Figure
7
we present some visualizations of our models on the electricity dataset.
(a)
FilterFormer
(b)
iFilterFormer
Figure 4:
Visualizations of our modelsŌĆÖ predictions on the input 96, prediction 720 task of the ECL dataset.
With a learned filter, these models are able to effectively capture high frequency patterns in the data over large prediction horizons, leading to the improvements in forecasting performance.
5.1.3
Model Efficiency
Here, let
d
d
denote the embedding dimension of our model,
L
L
the lookback length, and
H
H
the prediction horizon.
A single spectral block contains parameters from: 1) The batch normalization layers, 2) The actual spectral filter, and 3) the multilayer perceptron that processes the filtered signal before sending it to the next block.
Figure 5:
Number of parameters found in various implementations of our models with three attention layers, compared with iTransformer. Note that in practice the vast majority of our models have embedding dimension of 128 or 256.
The batch layers and filter contribute about
­ØÆ¬
ŌĆŗ
(
d
)
\mathcal{O}(d)
parameters each to our model, while the MLP contributes about
­ØÆ¬
ŌĆŗ
(
L
ŌĆŗ
d
+
H
ŌĆŗ
d
)
\mathcal{O}(Ld+Hd)
parameters. We have that the majority of parameters in this block come from our multilayer perceptron.
Model
Parameters (M)
FLOPs (G)
I.T. (ms/iter)
T.T (ms/iter)
FilterFormer
0.6
11.4
39.2
136.5
PatchTST
3.7
73.9
100.3
364.8
iTransformer
4.8
29.9
12.8
40.7
iFilterFormer
1.2
8.9
7.4
25.7
Leddam
8.5
25.24
18.6
88.5
FilterLeddam
8.5
25.25
18.6
87.2
FredFormer
12.1
38.32
25.2
101.5
Table 6:
Number of trainable parameters in the various models found in table
2
for the ECL input length 96 prediction horizon 96 forecasting task. The batch size was fixed at 16.
By choosing to remove the MLP from our spectral block, we have that adding the filter blocks contributes a minor number of parameters compared to the transformer architecture. In Figure
5
we show the number of parameters of our models as a function of the embedding dimension. In practice we only need an embedding dimension of 128-256 and around a total of 4 layers in our model, so that the results in Table
2
come from models using in between
0.5
0.5
and
3
3
million parameters. In Table
6
, we show the number of parameters needed by our models versus baselines to obtain the results found above. Our models are smaller because we can use a smaller embedding dimension compared to baseline while still obtaining good results. In this regard, while a filter adds more parameters to a given architecture, it can result in a lighter and faster model overall.
5.1.4
The Effect of Frequency Filters
We examine the frequency filters learned by our three models on the electricity dataset for a prediction horizon of 720.
(a)
FilterFormer
(b)
iFilterFormer
(c)
FilterLeddam
Figure 6:
Amplitude spectrums of the filters of our three models on the input 96, prediction horizon 720 task on the Electricity dataset.
There is not a one-to-one correlation between the filters learned by each model. This is in part because our filters are applied to embedded versions of the time series. Thus, if each model settles on a different embedding of the dataset, we would expect different needs from their respective filters. We do note that FilterFormer and iFilterFormer, which are both based upon fairly ŌĆ£traditional" implementations of self-attention, do have a bias toward middle and high frequency components. More specifically, the most attentuated frequencies occur in the upper two-thirds of the spectrum under consideration by our filter. This is not the case in FilterLeddam, which utilizes different implementations of attention.
To gather insight into how frequency filters enable our forecasting models when we are applying them to embedded signals, we conduct an experiment on a synthetic signal comprised of a low-frequency, mid-frequency, and high-frequency sine wave. In
Yi et┬Āal. (
2024
)
it was noted that the base iTransformer struggles with signals of this nature. This difficulty is often chalked up to the frequency bias of transformers
Piao et┬Āal. (
2024
)
: theoretical work suggests that self-attention acts as a low-pass filter
Shin et┬Āal. (
2024
)
. Thus, we would expect a transformer-based model to attenuate the high and middle frequencies of its signal as it passes through the attention blocks (we refer to this effect as oversmoothing). It should follow that we test both iTransformer and our iFilterFormer on this signal and plot the results in Figure
7
. As expected, the model with filter is able to model this signal more effectively. We can analyze the input signal in embedding space before and after the filter is applied to it. As we can see in Figure
8
, while the filter amplifies many of the frequencies found in the original embedding, the most disproportionally amplified frequencies are those in the mid-high range. In this regard, the filter operates close to a high-pass filter. It follows that filtering can counteract the oversmoothing effect of self-attention, leading to better predictions.
(a)
MSE = 1.0 e-1
(b)
MSE = 2.6e-4
Figure 7:
Performance of iTransformer on a simple synthetic signal with low, mid, and high frequencies a) without filter and b) with filter.
Figure 8:
The amplitude spectrum of the embedded signal in our synthetic experiment along with the amplitude spectrum of the embedding after we apply our spectral block.
To further validate the impact of our filters, we plot the filters from our FilterFormer model on the ETT and Weather datasets. As with the prior results, the frequency components most amplified by the filters are in the middle to high range.
(a)
ETTm2
(b)
Weather
Figure 9:
Learned filters from our FilterFormer model on the ETTm2 and Weather datasets. In both tasks the lookback length is 96 and the prediction horizon is 720.
6
Ablation Studies
6.0.1
Varying the Number of Layers
For a fixed number
╬▒
\alpha
of filter layers, we are interested in knowing the effect of adding additional attention layers. To study this, we focused on the Electricity dataset with a forecasting horizon of 720. We fixed our model to have two spectral gating blocks, then adjusted the number of attention blocks. The results of this can be seen in figure
10
. Going from zero attention blocks (as PaiFilter would have) to multiple attention blocks does lead to a large relative improvement in mean square error. We believe that due to the limited size of our datasets, we quickly see diminishing returns from additional attention blocks to our model.
Figure 10:
The performance of FilterFormer with 2 spectral gating blocks (with MLP) and a varied number of attention blocks.
6.0.2
Varying the Number of Filters
Next, we are interested in knowing if there is an optimal balance of spectral blocks versus attention blocks in our FilterFormer model. To investigate this, we train our FilterFormer model on the Electricity dataset with a forecasting horizon of 720. We fix our model to have 6 layers in total, then adjust
╬▒
\alpha
, the number of spectral layers, from 0 to 6. In this experiment, all of our spectral blocks have a Multilayer Perceptron. We observe in figure
11
that while the model works best if there is a mix of filtering and attention, the exact mix is not too important to the forecasting performance. We also note that when the model consists of only spectral blocks, it still outperforms FilterNet. This implies that stacking spectral layers and applying patch embedding are very beneficial for filtered models even if attention is not involved.
Figure 11:
The performance of FilterFormer with 6 layers,
╬▒
\alpha
of which are Spectral Blocks and
6
ŌłÆ
╬▒
6-\alpha
of which are attention blocks
6.0.3
Placing the Filter before Patching and Embedding
One experiment we conducted was whether the learned filter could be placed before the embedding layer of the transformer-based model. If it could, this would be beneficial because it would be even smaller (having only
­ØÆ¬
ŌĆŗ
(
L
)
\mathcal{O}(L)
parameters, where
L
L
is the look-back length) and would be more prone to interpretibility. We thus attempted to move the filter in both FilterFormer and iFilterFormer to occur right after the Reversible Instance Normalization
Kim et┬Āal. (
2021
)
occurs. When we trained these models on the electricity dataset for a prediction horizon of 720, we found that the models performed much worse than when the filters were applied to the embedded signal.
Models
FilterFormer
iFilterFormer
MSE
.221
.233
.208
.225
Table 7:
Performance of FilterFormer and iFilterFormer on the electricity dataset, prediction horizon of 720. First column indicates results when filter is applied to embedding signal while second column indicates results when filter is applied to original signal.
(a)
ETTm2
(b)
Weather
Figure 12:
Predictions from our FilterFormer model with lookback length 96 and prediction horizon 720.
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we demonstrated that adding a learnable filter improves the ability of transformer-based LTSF models. By incorporating the most basic implementation of a learnable filter into popular transformer LTSF models, we were able to create new models that were greater than the sum of their parts while still being lightweight and quick. We validated this effectiveness by testing our new models on datasets spanning a variety of domains and complexities. Even for state of the art forecasting models, we were able to see large improvements in forecasting accuracy with only minor increases in memory and speed requirements. We thus recommend adding a learned filter as a basic configuration for transformer-based forecasting models. It will rarely degrade performance, but it has the potential to drastically improve it. We intentionally stuck to a simple type of filter to demonstrate the efficacy of the method. We believe that further improvements can be made by developing more advanced learnable filters. Along this line, we believe that more work should be done to develop learned filters that are easier to interpret and that are steerable (e.g. a learnable filter that be pushed to be high-pass in nature). Overall, we hope that this work leads to further use of filters in conjunction with transformers in the field of long-term forecasting.
8
Acknowledgments
The work was partially supported by NSF grants DMS-2151235 and DMS-2219904.
References
Maleki et┬Āal. [2024]
Neda Maleki, Oxana Lundstr├Čm, Arslan Musaddiq, John Jeansson, Tobias Olsson, and Fredrik Ahlgren.
Future energy insights: Time-series and deep learning models for city load forecasting.
Applied Energy
, 374:124067, 2024.
Van Der┬ĀBijl et┬Āal. [2022]
Bas Van Der┬ĀBijl, Bart Gijsbertsen, Stan Van┬ĀLoon, Yorran Reurich, Tom De┬ĀValk, Thomas Koch, and Elenna Dugundji.
A comparison of approaches for the time series forecasting of motorway traffic flow rate at hourly and daily aggregation levels.
Procedia Computer Science
, 201:213ŌĆō222, 2022.
Gajamannage et┬Āal. [2023]
Kelum Gajamannage, Yonggi Park, and Dilhani┬ĀI Jayathilake.
Real-time forecasting of time series in financial markets using sequentially trained dual-lstms.
Expert Systems with Applications
, 223:119879, 2023.
Kong et┬Āal. [2025]
Yaxuan Kong, Zepu Wang, Yuqi Nie, Tian Zhou, Stefan Zohren, Yuxuan Liang, Peng Sun, and Qingsong Wen.
Unlocking the power of lstm for long term time series forecasting.
In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
, volume┬Ā39, pages 11968ŌĆō11976, 2025.
Zhang et┬Āal. [2024]
Yifan Zhang, Rui Wu, Sergiu┬ĀM Dascalu, and Frederick┬ĀC Harris┬ĀJr.
A novel extreme adaptive gru for multivariate time series forecasting.
Scientific Reports
, 14(1):2991, 2024.
Zeng et┬Āal. [2023]
Ailing Zeng, Muxi Chen, Lei Zhang, and Qiang Xu.
Are transformers effective for time series forecasting?
In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence
, volume┬Ā37, pages 11121ŌĆō11128, 2023.
Yi et┬Āal. [2023a]
Kun Yi, Qi┬ĀZhang, Longbing Cao, Shoujin Wang, Guodong Long, Liang Hu, Hui He, Zhendong Niu, Wei Fan, and Hui Xiong.
A survey on deep learning based time series analysis with frequency transformation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02173
, 2023a.
Yi et┬Āal. [2024]
Kun Yi, Jingru Fei, Qi┬ĀZhang, Hui He, Shufeng Hao, Defu Lian, and Wei Fan.
FilterNet: Harnessing frequency filters for time series forecasting.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, 37:55115ŌĆō55140, 2024.
Patro et┬Āal. [2025]
Badri┬ĀN Patro, Vinay┬ĀP Namboodiri, and Vijay┬ĀS Agneeswaran.
Spectformer: Frequency and attention is what you need in a vision transformer.
In
2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)
, pages 9543ŌĆō9554. IEEE, 2025.
Zhou et┬Āal. [2021]
Haoyi Zhou, Shanghang Zhang, Jieqi Peng, Shuai Zhang, Jianxin Li, Hui Xiong, and Wancai Zhang.
Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting.
In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence
, volume┬Ā35, pages 11106ŌĆō11115, 2021.
Wu et┬Āal. [2021]
Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long.
Autoformer: Decomposition transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting.
Advances in neural information processing systems
, 34:22419ŌĆō22430, 2021.
Nie et┬Āal. [2022]
Yuqi Nie, Nam┬ĀH Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam.
A time series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14730
, 2022.
Liu et┬Āal. [2023]
Yong Liu, Tengge Hu, Haoran Zhang, Haixu Wu, Shiyu Wang, Lintao Ma, and Mingsheng Long.
itransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time series forecasting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06625
, 2023.
Yu et┬Āal. [2024]
Guoqi Yu, Jing Zou, Xiaowei Hu, Angelica┬ĀI Aviles-Rivero, Jing Qin, and Shujun Wang.
Revitalizing multivariate time series forecasting: Learnable decomposition with inter-series dependencies and intra-series variations modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12694
, 2024.
Shumway et┬Āal. [2000]
Robert┬ĀH Shumway, David┬ĀS Stoffer, and David┬ĀS Stoffer.
Time series analysis and its applications
, volume┬Ā3.
Springer, 2000.
Zhou et┬Āal. [2022]
Tian Zhou, Ziqing Ma, Qingsong Wen, Xue Wang, Liang Sun, and Rong Jin.
Fedformer: Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting.
In
International conference on machine learning
, pages 27268ŌĆō27286. PMLR, 2022.
Piao et┬Āal. [2024]
Xihao Piao, Zheng Chen, Taichi Murayama, Yasuko Matsubara, and Yasushi Sakurai.
Fredformer: Frequency debiased transformer for time series forecasting.
In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
, pages 2400ŌĆō2410, 2024.
Yi et┬Āal. [2023b]
Kun Yi, Qi┬ĀZhang, Wei Fan, Shoujin Wang, Pengyang Wang, Hui He, Ning An, Defu Lian, Longbing Cao, and Zhendong Niu.
Frequency-domain mlps are more effective learners in time series forecasting.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
, 36:76656ŌĆō76679, 2023b.
Xu et┬Āal. [2024]
Zhijian Xu, Ailing Zeng, and Qiang Xu.
FITS: Modeling time series with $10k$ parameters.
In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations
, 2024.
URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=bWcnvZ3qMb
.
Cooley and Tukey [1965]
James┬ĀW Cooley and John┬ĀW Tukey.
An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex fourier series.
Mathematics of computation
, 19(90):297ŌĆō301, 1965.
Proakis [2007]
John┬ĀG Proakis.
Digital signal processing: principles, algorithms, and applications, 4/E
.
Pearson Education India, 2007.
Kim et┬Āal. [2021]
Taesung Kim, Jinhee Kim, Yunwon Tae, Cheonbok Park, Jang-Ho Choi, and Jaegul Choo.
Reversible instance normalization for accurate time-series forecasting against distribution shift.
In
International conference on learning representations
, 2021.
Ioffe and Szegedy [2015]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy.
Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
In
International conference on machine learning
, pages 448ŌĆō456. pmlr, 2015.
Eldele et┬Āal. [2024]
Emadeldeen Eldele, Mohamed Ragab, Zhenghua Chen, Min Wu, and Xiaoli Li.
Tslanet: Rethinking transformers for time series representation learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08472
, 2024.
Kingma and Ba [2014]
Diederik┬ĀP Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
, 2014.
Shin et┬Āal. [2024]
Yehjin Shin, Jeongwhan Choi, Hyowon Wi, and Noseong Park.
An attentive inductive bias for sequential recommendation beyond the self-attention.
In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
, volume┬Ā38, pages 8984ŌĆō8992, 2024.
Generated  on Wed Aug 27 18:32:01 2025 by
L
a
T
e
XML