Implementing CPSLint: A Data Validation and Sanitisation Tool for Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1
Introduction
2
Data
2.1
Data format
2.2
Data compartmentalisation
2.3
Emulating data corruptions
3
Using
CPSLint
3.1
Setup
3.2
Main features
3.3
Example programs
Example program 1:
out_of_bounds.cps
Example program 2:
datatype_mismatch.cps
3.4
Planned features
4
Design and implementation
4.1
Language front-end
4.2
Ad hoc Python sanitisation
4.3
The compiler back-end
4.4
The interpreter back-end
4.5
Integration into pipelines
5
Related work
6
Conclusion and future work
Acknowledgements
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2604.18191v1 [cs.PL] 20 Apr 2026
*[itemize]labelindent=10pt, itemindent=0pt, leftmargin=*
\copyrightclause
Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
\conference
Post-proceedings of BENEVOL 2025
[orcid=0000-0003-1094-0234,
email=u.odyurt@utwente.nl,
]
[orcid=0009-0009-8860-2316,
email=o.f.sayilir@utwente.nl,
]
[orcid=0000-0001-6793-8165,
email=m.i.a.stoelinga@utwente.nl,
]
[orcid=0000-0001-7764-4224,
email=vadim@grammarware.net,
]
Implementing CPSLint: A Data Validation and Sanitisation Tool for Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems
Uraz Odyurt
Ömer Sayilir
Mariëlle Stoelinga
Vadim Zaytsev
Dynamics Based Maintenance, ET Faculty, University of Twente, The Netherlands
Formal Methods and Tools, EEMCS Faculty, University of Twente, The Netherlands
(2026)
Abstract
Raw datasets are often too large and unstructured to work with directly, and require a data preparation phase. The domain of industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) is no exception, as raw data typically consists of large time-series data collections that log the system’s status at regular time intervals. The processing of such raw data is often carried out using ad hoc, case-specific, one-off Python scripts, often neglecting aspects of readability, reusability, and maintainability. In practice, this can cause professionals such as data scientists to write similar data preparation scripts for each case, requiring them to do much repetitive work. We introduce
CPSLint
, a Domain-Specific Language (DSL) designed to support the data preparation process for industrial CPS.
CPSLint
raises the level of abstraction to the point where both data scientists and domain experts can perform the data preparation task. We leverage the fact that many raw data collections in the industrial CPS domain require similar actions to render them suitable for data-centric workflows. In our DSL one can express the data preparation process in just a few lines of code.
CPSLint
is a publicly available tool applicable for any case involving time-series data collections in need of sanitisation.
keywords:
Domain-Specific Language
\sep
Data validation
\sep
Data sanitisation
\sep
Industrial CPS
\sep
Tool support
1
Introduction
Data from Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) is crucial for gaining insight into the functioning of these complex systems, both in the form of real-time fault detection and postmortem analysis of failures. Runtime traces from these systems can often contain corrupted data originating from, for example, faulty sensor readings, missing readings due to sensor outages, or even human error while managing this data. When performing diagnostics with CPS data, it is important to sanitise the data and ensure such corruptions would not interfere with the intended data processing. In the context of industrial CPS, data sanitisation requires both domain knowledge and programming skill, thus often requiring both a domain expert and a data scientist to be involved in performing the task. Besides the fact that it requires multiple domains of expertise, the code written to sanitise a specific dataset is often not re-applicable to other cases, creating a situation in which time and effort are spent writing single-use Python scripts.
Ideally speaking, such data sanitisation would be designed best if it is done by a domain expert who possesses programming skills as well. As this is seldom the case, having a simplified and contained language instead of a general programming language, e.g., Python, would enable domain experts for this task. Domain-Specific Languages (DSLs) are a good fit when it comes to context-specific language design.
Following this rationale, we introduce
CPSLint
, a DSL built to aid the data sanitisation process. The language raises the level of abstraction for performing data sanitisation, making it accessible to domain experts and allowing them to perform this task without requiring substantial programming knowledge. It also has a relatively compact declarative syntax, making it a also suitable tool for data scientists by significantly reducing the amount of code they would need to write to sanitise a dataset.
Figure
˜
1
depicts an example of a typical
CPSLint
workflow. The compiler takes a
CPSLint
specification and a raw CSV file as input. Our implementation then uses these to generate a human-readable Python script, capable of sanitising the raw CSV according to the provided definition. This script can then be run using a Python interpreter to obtain a sanitised CSV.
Figure 1
:
A typical
CPSLint
workflow for sanitising CPS machine traces.
Cyber-physical systems
are complex systems combining cyber elements, i.e., computational and networked components, with interactions in the physical domain. Their design often integrates multitudes of subsystems, working in tandem to perform specific, specialised task. Thus, CPS are purpose-built machines. The industrial variants exhibit a significantly higher level of complexity and precision, excelling in high-yield production for high-tech industries. It is standard practice to constantly monitor industrial CPS for machine behaviour tracking and fault detection/prevention. Time-series data collection is the de facto monitoring data format for these devices.
Domain-Specific Languages
are programming languages with a higher level of abstraction than General-purpose Programming Languages (GPLs)
[
Mernik:2005:WHDD
]
. They are designed for specific tasks and enable domain experts to perform programming using familiar terms and concepts. The output of DSLs need not be executable, as in the case of
L
a
T
e
X
, YAML, and HTML, which are all markup languages. In short, DSLs make it easier for non-programmer domain experts to perform tasks programmatically within their domain than GPLs do.
Contribution
We showcase a DSL that was built based on similarities across the data validation and sanitisation domains, combined with information from the cyber-physical domain. The current implementation of
CPSLint
provides a small but powerful declarative data sanitisation language. The compactness of our current implementation is demonstrated by a relatively small codebase, i.e., 1 978 lines of code. The data involved in our demonstrations, alongside the
CPSLint
code, are openly available
[
Sayilir:2025:CODE
]
1
1
1
Also available at:
https://github.com/omersayilir75/CPSLint
.
The theoretical background leading to
CPSLint
as a tool and more detailed information on use-cases, alongside systematic benchmarking of computational performance for different modes, is provided in
[
Odyurt:2025:DSLP
]
.
2
Data
While it can be adapted in other scenarios,
CPSLint
is primarily designed to work with industrial CPS data. The term ‘data’ in this context loosely refers to the combination of sensor data, alongside contextual logs. Accordingly, sensor data is recorded as time-series, covering one or more metrics. While the recoding is commonly done at a high frequency, e.g., 1 kHz, each metric will be recorded with a frequency supported by the respective sensor and collection logic. As an example relevant to our demonstration use-case, power metrics such as voltage and current can be collected from different components on a system. Depending on the desired granularity or available support, such collections could happen at the component level, the controller level (for instance motor controller), at the subsystem level, or at the system level.
The contextual logs are expected to contain the signalling information related to a system’s activity, i.e., start and stop signals per task or subtask. While being a common practice, the granularity at which such signals are recorded depends on the designer’s foresight. It must be mentioned that given access to the underlying software element of an industrial CPS, it is relatively easy to extend contextual logging.
2.1
Data format
When considering time-series data, the de facto format is Comma-Separated Values (CSV) files. The
timestamp
column is almost always present, with rare exceptions that consider an ordered index instead. One or more metric columns are included as well, depending on the modality of collected data. For instance, CSV files from our demonstration use-case include voltage, current and energy readings, as detailed below:
•
Timestamps (S) column with values in ms
•
Voltage (V) column with values recorded at 1 kHz
•
Current (A) column with values recorded at 4 kHz
•
Energy (J) column with values reflecting consumed energy
•
Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter (UART) messages as string data
The UART message column is populated sparsely, only indicating subtask starts and stops, or transmitting information such as processor core temperature.
2.2
Data compartmentalisation
One of the preprocessing steps governing the dataset formation for ML model training is the compartmentalisation of data according to execution phases. Execution phases are segments of monitoring data, reflecting the behaviour of the system under scrutiny per individual task or subtask during an execution. In other words, the time-series data from the start till the stop signal is associated with the respective task. In this fashion, the data can be
cut
in individual phases.
Figure
˜
2
depicts the concept and provides the phases considered in our demonstration use-case.
Figure 2
:
Different data compartmentalisation granularities within an execution timeline, visualising repeated phase types during consecutive rounds of tasks/sub-tasks, plus the phases considered for processing consecutive image data.
2.3
Emulating data corruptions
CPSLint
is capable of both sanitising and compartmentalising time-series data. To be able to systematically evaluate and demonstrate these functionalities, a series of corrupt data examples are devised. This is done through Python scripts manipulating reference data, i.e., correct data, and emulating known corruption patters. The considered reference data is collected from an embedded platform with repetitive sequential activity, as described by Odyurt et al.
[
Odyurt:2021:PPFT
]
.
The corruptions are applied to the reference data in non-overlapping blocks of rows, in this case 10-row blocks. The total corruption rate is 0.5%, which is a good amount considering how extensiveness the reference data is. Note that while not affecting
CPSLint
functionality, the block size and corruption rate are configurable parameters. Blocks are selected at random unless the emulated corruption is targeted. Corruptions can be applied individually, or in combination. The following types are supported:
Data type mismatch
Numeric fields are injected with invalid characters, e.g., letters or special symbols, rendering them non-parsable. In some cases, the Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter (UART) identifier field is also corrupted, simulating noisy channel logs.
Data type mismatch with targeted UART
Similar to the previous corruption, but biased towards affecting rows associated with a specified UART identifier. This enables testing of selective corruption of device-specific data. UART data fields are especially important for steering the targeted solution and as such, it is important to have cases with noisy UART messages.
Out-of-bounds values
Numeric fields are replaced with extreme constants, e.g.,
“99 999.999”
, that are far outside expected measurement ranges. Depending on configuration, this may affect all numeric columns or a random subset within each block.
Out-of-order rows with reliable timestamps
Rows in a block are randomly permuted, but their original timestamps are preserved. This emulates reordering of messages while maintaining temporal information.
Out-of-order rows with unreliable timestamps
Rows are shuffled and new, monotonically increasing timestamps are generated for the block. This emulates cases where both order and timing data are compromised during collection.
Missing fields
A randomly chosen numeric column is blanked out across all rows in a block, representing systematic loss of a sensor channel.
Missing rows
Entire blocks of rows are deleted, optionally biased toward containing a specified UART identifier. This models partial loss of data segments, such as dropped packets or truncated logs.
Misplaced end-of-line markers
Rows within a block are concatenated with their successors, simulating the effect of missing or corrupted line delimiters. This results in malformed records and broken row alignment, resembling common parsing errors in raw log files.
3
Using
CPSLint
3.1
Setup
To set up
CPSLint
in a workspace, the DSL needs to be configured with a set of parameters. These include location of the input CSV files, the desired output folder, a command to invoke Python, and which pipeline to use for execution of the specification. The parameters are to be defined in a YAML file in the folder where the
CPSLint
definitions are located. An example of such a configuration file is given in
LABEL:lst:config
.
⬇
1
inputFolder
:
~/
data
/
input
2
outputFolder
:
~/
data
/
output
3
pythonCommand
:
python
4
runWith
:
interpreter
#
Current
options:
interpreter,
compiler
Listing 1:
The config.yaml
As can be seen in
LABEL:lst:config
,
CPSLint
allows for the use of multiple back-ends: a compiler pipeline, meant for generating well performing idiomatic Python code, and an interpreter pipeline, a back-end meant for debugging and diagnostic purposes at the cost of performance. A more detailed overview of these pipelines is given in
Section
˜
4
.
Regardless of which back-end pipeline is chosen, the user can use the language in one of two ways: through the Rascal REPL, or through the Language Server Protocol (LSP) interface provided by Rascal. Accessing
CPSLint
through the Rascal REPL allows the use of the language without the overhead of an IDE. When considering this option, the
Runner
module can be imported to run the
CPSLint
programs through calling the
run
function from the REPL, by giving the location of the program to be executed as an argument. An example of this usage pattern is given in
LABEL:lst:REPL
.
⬇
1
rascal
>
import
Runner
;
2
ok
3
rascal
>
run
(|
project
://
cps
-
dsl
/
Input
/
scripts
/
input
.
cps
|);
Listing 2:
An example showing showing how to run
CPSLint
specifications through the Rascal REPL.
Using the LSP implementation gives the user Visual Studio Code support, bringing
CPSLint
language features to the editor. These features can be enabled by importing the
CPSLintLanguageServer
module through the Rascal REPL and running the
main
function, which in turn registers the
CPSLint
language and makes the editor ready for use. In
Figure
˜
3
, we illustrate what the IDE environment looks like. As can be seen, we provide syntax highlighting for the language and a way to run the current program.
Figure 3
:
CPSLint
language features running in Visual Studio Code.
3.2
Main features
The current implementation of the
CPSLint
language can be provides the following core feature set:
Data inspection and script generation
This feature is meant as a starting point when working with a new dataset using
CPSLint
. Here the user can write a one-line command such as
inspect
csv
from
’input.csv’
;
, which instructs
CPSLint
to produce a specification based on the given CSV file. Users can then use this to continue defining how the CSV in question should be processed.
Data corruption remediation
A large chunk of
CPSLint
’s functionality revolves around the remediation of corrupt data. This includes features such as enforcing datatypes on columns to ensure that only values of an expected type are present. It can also set valid ranges for numeric columns, such that faulty readings are removed from the dataset. Additionally, it may filter unwanted substrings out of the data, ensuring that any unexpected characters that appear due to, for example, lossy channels are removed.
Data imputation
CPSLint
also allows for the imputation of missing data. The interpolation methods the language offers range from simple ones, such as using the mean or median of a column, or forward or backfilling the column with known values, to more involved ones, such as polynomial interpolation.
Data compartmentalisation
CPSLint
supports data compartmentalisation through the
export
command. Using this command, the user can specify based on which column they would like to split a file into smaller ones. For example,
export
csv
...
to
’output#.csv’
cut
when
’UART’
is
’image
loader’
~;
instructs
CPSLint
to create multiple output CSV files, each covering an unique instance where image loading happens.
3.3
Example programs
Here, we will go over a few representative input programs for
CPSLint
and explain them in detail.
Example program 1:
out_of_bounds.cps
This program is representative of a case where the it can be assumed that the input CSV has correct column types, but contains rows in which column values lie outside the defined valid ranges.
⬇
1
import
csv
from
’out_of_bounds.csv’
,
skip
empty
;
2
export
csv
3
(
4
’Timestamp
(S)’
is
timestamp
,
real
,
in
(
0
..
1
2
0
];
5
’Arc
Main
Current
(A)’
is
current
,
real
,
in
[
0
.
4
..
1
.
0
);
6
’Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)’
is
voltage
,
real
,
in
[
5
Â
±
\pm
0
.
6
];
7
’Arc
Main
Energy
(J)’
is
energy
,
real
,
in
(
0
..
4
0
0
);
8
’Arc
UART
(TXT)’
is
’uart’
;
9
)
10
to
’out_of_bounds_fixed.csv’
;
Listing 3:
CPSLint
code for Example Program 1
In
LABEL:lst:ex1
, we show a program where first a CSV is imported through the
import
command, then empty lines are removed through the
skip
empty
row filter; row filters are applied at the row level across the file. The second command in the file is the
export
command, here the columns found in the import file are mapped to rows in the output file through the
is
keyword. Then for all numeric columns, the DSL is instructed to view them as
real
values. Finally, the
in
keyword is used to indicate a valid numeric range for each column before exporting the CSV to the output file. Cells where the data is outside the defined valid range of a column are emptied without affecting the rest of the row.
⬇
1
#
Generated
by
CPSlint
2
#
Input:
out_of_bounds.cps
3
4
#
Import
libraries
5
...
6
7
#
Auxiliary
functions
8
...
9
10
def
call_cpslint
():
11
#
Read
input
CSV
12
input_path
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
"~/data/input"
,
"out_of_bounds.csv"
)
13
df_in
=
pd
.
read_csv
(
input_path
)
14
#
Skip
empty
rows
15
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^\s*$’
,
pd
.
NA
,
regex
=
True
).
dropna
(
how
=
"all"
)
16
#
Create
output
DataFrame
17
df_out
=
pd
.
DataFrame
()
18
#
Copy
column
"Timestamp
(S)"
as
"timestamp"
in
the
output
DataFrame
19
df_out["timestamp"]
=
df_in["Timestamp
(S)"]
20
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Current
(A)"
as
"current"
in
the
output
DataFrame
21
df_out["current"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Current
(A)"]
22
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)"
as
"voltage"
in
the
output
DataFrame
23
df_out["voltage"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)"]
24
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Energy
(J)"
as
"energy"
in
the
output
DataFrame
25
df_out["energy"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Energy
(J)"]
26
#
Copy
column
"Arc
UART
(TXT)"
as
"uart"
in
the
output
DataFrame
27
df_out["uart"]
=
df_in["Arc
UART
(TXT)"]
28
#
Cast
values
of
timestamp
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
29
df_out["timestamp"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["timestamp"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
30
#
Emptying
cells
in
timestamp
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
0.
and
120.,
with
inclusive
set
to
right
31
df_out
.
loc
[~
df_out
[
"timestamp"
].
between
(
0
.,
1
2
0
.,
inclusive
=
"right"
),
"timestamp"
]
=
np
.
nan
32
#
Cast
values
of
current
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
33
df_out["current"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["current"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
34
#
Emptying
cells
in
current
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
0.4
and
1.0,
with
inclusive
set
to
left
35
df_out
.
loc
[~
df_out
[
"current"
].
between
(
0
.
4
,
1
.
0
,
inclusive
=
"left"
),
"current"
]
=
np
.
nan
36
#
Cast
values
of
voltage
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
37
df_out["voltage"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["voltage"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
38
#
Emptying
cells
in
voltage
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
4.4
and
5.6,
with
inclusive
set
to
both
39
df_out
.
loc
[~
df_out
[
"voltage"
].
between
(
4
.
4
,
5
.
6
,
inclusive
=
"both"
),
"voltage"
]
=
np
.
nan
40
#
Cast
values
of
energy
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
41
df_out["energy"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["energy"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
42
#
Emptying
cells
in
energy
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
0.
and
400.,
with
inclusive
set
to
neither
43
df_out
.
loc
[~
df_out
[
"energy"
].
between
(
0
.,
4
0
0
.,
inclusive
=
"neither"
),
"energy"
]
=
np
.
nan
44
#
Write
Output
CSV
45
output_path
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
"~/data/output"
,
"out_of_bounds_fixed.csv"
)
46
df_out
.
to_csv
(
output_path
,
index
=
False
)
47
call_cpslint
()
Listing 4:
Python code generated by running Example Program 1 using the
CPSLint
compiler
When this program is run using the
CPSLint
compiler, the code in
LABEL:lst:ex1py
is generated as an intermediate artefact; when executed, this Python code produces the output CSV.
Example program 2:
datatype_mismatch.cps
The second program is representative to one that would be written when there are unexpected types encountered in columns where a certain type is expected. In this case there are string values in numeric columns that need to be removed.
⬇
1
import
csv
from
’datatype_mismatch.csv’
,
skip
empty
,
skip
~
’#’
~,
skip
~
’@’
~,
skip
~
’$’
~,
skip
~
’abc’
~;
2
export
csv
3
(
4
’Timestamp
(S)’
is
timestamp
,
real
;
5
’Arc
Main
Current
(A)’
is
current
,
real
,
impute
linear
interpolation
;
6
’Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)’
is
voltage
,
real
,
impute
linear
interpolation
;
7
’Arc
Main
Energy
(J)’
is
energy
,
real
,
impute
linear
interpolation
;
8
’Arc
UART
(TXT)’
is
’uart’
;
9
)
10
to
’datatype_mismatch_fixed.csv’
;
Listing 5:
CPSLint
code for Example Program 2
The
import
command in
LABEL:lst:ex2
starts off similar to the one in the first example program, however here there are also file wide substring filters defined by the
skip
column filters in the command. The
export
command starts off by enforcing the appropriate datatypes on the columns. Furthermore, the
export
command fills any cells that might have been emptied by previous operations, or were already empty in the input CSV, via the
impute
keyword, using
linear
interpolation
as an imputation strategy.
⬇
1
#
Generated
by
CPSlint
2
#
Input:
datatype_mismatch.cps
3
4
#
Import
libraries
5
...
6
7
#
Auxiliary
functions
8
...
9
10
def
call_cpslint
():
11
#
Read
input
CSV
12
input_path
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
"~/data/input"
,
"datatype_mismatch.csv"
)
13
df_in
=
pd
.
read_csv
(
input_path
)
14
#
Blank
out
values
that
contain
#
15
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^.*’
+
re
.
escape
(
"#"
)
+
r’.*$’
,
’’
,
regex
=
True
)
16
#
Blank
out
values
that
contain
@
17
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^.*’
+
re
.
escape
(
"@"
)
+
r’.*$’
,
’’
,
regex
=
True
)
18
#
Blank
out
values
that
contain
$
19
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^.*’
+
re
.
escape
(
"$"
)
+
r’.*$’
,
’’
,
regex
=
True
)
20
#
Blank
out
values
that
contain
abc
21
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^.*’
+
re
.
escape
(
"abc"
)
+
r’.*$’
,
’’
,
regex
=
True
)
22
#
Skip
empty
rows
23
df_in
=
df_in
.
replace
(
r’^\s*$’
,
pd
.
NA
,
regex
=
True
).
dropna
(
how
=
"all"
)
24
#
Create
output
DataFrame
25
df_out
=
pd
.
DataFrame
()
26
#
Copy
column
"Timestamp
(S)"
as
"timestamp"
in
the
output
DataFrame
27
df_out["timestamp"]
=
df_in["Timestamp
(S)"]
28
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Current
(A)"
as
"current"
in
the
output
DataFrame
29
df_out["current"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Current
(A)"]
30
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)"
as
"voltage"
in
the
output
DataFrame
31
df_out["voltage"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Voltage
(V)"]
32
#
Copy
column
"Arc
Main
Energy
(J)"
as
"energy"
in
the
output
DataFrame
33
df_out["energy"]
=
df_in["Arc
Main
Energy
(J)"]
34
#
Copy
column
"Arc
UART
(TXT)"
as
"uart"
in
the
output
DataFrame
35
df_out["uart"]
=
df_in["Arc
UART
(TXT)"]
36
#
Cast
values
of
timestamp
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
37
df_out["timestamp"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["timestamp"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
38
#
Cast
values
of
current
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
39
df_out["current"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["current"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
40
#
Impute
with
stategy:
empty
cells
in
current
are
replaced
using
interpolation
with
the
linear
method
41
df_out
[
"current"
]
=
df_out
[
"current"
].
interpolate
(
method
=
"linear"
)
42
#
Cast
values
of
voltage
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
43
df_out["voltage"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["voltage"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
44
#
Impute
with
stategy:
empty
cells
in
voltage
are
replaced
using
interpolation
with
the
linear
method
45
df_out
[
"voltage"
]
=
df_out
[
"voltage"
].
interpolate
(
method
=
"linear"
)
46
#
Cast
values
of
energy
to
float
if
possible,
set
to
NaN
otherwise
47
df_out["energy"]
=
pd.to_numeric(df_out["energy"],
errors="coerce").astype(float)
48
#
Impute
with
stategy:
empty
cells
in
energy
are
replaced
using
interpolation
with
the
linear
method
49
df_out
[
"energy"
]
=
df_out
[
"energy"
].
interpolate
(
method
=
"linear"
)
50
#
Write
Output
CSV
51
output_path
=
os
.
path
.
join
(
"~/data/output"
,
"datatype_mismatch_fixed.csv"
)
52
df_out
.
to_csv
(
output_path
,
index
=
False
)
53
call_cpslint
()
Listing 6:
Python code generated by running Example Program 2 using the
CPSLint
compiler
The Python code generated by the
CPSLint
compiler can be found in
LABEL:lst:ex2py
. It should be noted that most interpolation methods supported by Pandas rely on SciPy being installed.
3.4
Planned features
Future iterations of
CPSLint
are planned to bring features that would better serve the needs of the domain for which it is built. The declarative nature of the syntax of
CPSLint
makes the language relatively easy to extend at the syntax level, with new features requiring only minor edits of the grammar. The main additions would be to introduce the concept of domain-specific units (Volt, Watt, mAh) as native data types. This would enable us to perform safe and simple type conversions on columns. Another extension of applicability is support more data source formats, e.g., HDF5 files or time-series databases. Future iterations of
CPSLint
could support compartmentalisation based on numerical columns, where, for instance, time-series data is cut according to peaks, valleys, and plateaus in these values. This is useful in cases where the data cannot be cut based on clear logged indicators due to their absence, unreliability, or corrupt state.
Another extension that would make the language more broadly applicable is the support for custom Python libraries within the compiler pipeline. These would contain functions taking either a
DataFrame
(for operations at the table level) or a
Series
(for operations at the column level) as their input. In this way, users can add their own case-specific algorithms to preprocess data using
CPSLint
. An example of what this extension could look like is depicted in
LABEL:lst:pylibs
.
⬇
1
using
<
library
.
py
>;
2
import
csv
from
’input.csv’
,
skip
empty
,
skip
’#’
,
skip
’@’
,
perform
<
tableOperation
>;
3
export
csv
4
(
5
...
6
’Arc
Main
Current
(A)’
is
current
,
real
,
in
[
0
.
6
..
1
.
4
],
perform
<
rowOperation
>;
7
...
8
)
9
to
’output.csv’
;
Listing 7:
Syntax for using external libraries in
CPSLint
.
4
Design and implementation
CPSLint
is implemented using the Rascal meta programming language
[
Klint:2009:RDSL
,
Klint:2011:EMPR
]
, a
“one-stop-shop”
language workbench for rapid implementation of DSLs. The language offers its users a shared front-end and two back-ends: the
compiler
, which generates human-readable, idiomatic Python code that performs the tasks described by the
CPSLint
input program; and the direct interpreter in Rascal, providing granular insight into the data sanitisation process in the form of logs and intermediate CSV files. In this section, we go over the internals of
CPSLint
.
4.1
Language front-end
The syntax of
CPSLint
has been kept relatively simple, with the language only knowing three actions:
inspect
for initial analysis of the data,
import
for reading, and
export
for writing. The syntax of the language was created during design sessions with domain experts, with the goal of making a language that is familiar, sufficiently expressive, but not overly bloated.
The entire abstract syntax definition, illustrating the simplicity of the DSL, is contained in
LABEL:lst:grammar
.
⬇
1
module
syntaxes
::
Abstract
2
3
alias
Script
=
list
[
Action
];
4
alias
Mapping
=
tuple
[
str
from
,
str
to
,
list
[
Filter
]
filters
];
5
alias
Mappings
=
lrel
[
str
from
,
str
to
,
list
[
Filter
]
filters
];
6
alias
Border
=
tuple
[
str
name
,
Stringish
val
];
7
8
data
Action
9
=
ImportAction
(
DataFormat
format
,
list
[
Filter
]
filters
,
str
filename
)
10
|
ExportAction
(
DataFormat
format
,
list
[
Mapping
]
mappings
,
str
filename
,
Border
border
)
11
|
InspectAction
(
DataFormat
format
,
str
filename
)
12
|
Inaction
(
str
message
)
13
;
14
15
data
DataFormat
=
CSV
();
16
17
data
Stringish
18
=
JustString
(
str
text
)
19
|
RegExp
(
str
regex
)
20
|
StartsWith
(
str
begin
)
21
|
EndsWith
(
str
end
)
22
|
Contains
(
str
middle
)
23
;
24
25
data
Filter
26
=
SkipEmptyRows
()
27
|
SkipEmptyColumns
()
28
|
SkipOutOfOrder
()
29
|
SkipIgnored
(
Stringish
what
)
30
|
InRange
(
real
low
,
real
high
,
bool
includeLow
,
bool
includeHigh
)
31
|
EnforceType
(
SupportedType
t
)
32
|
EnforceOrder
()
33
|
Impute
(
Strategy
s
)
34
|
IsCritical
()
35
|
Unique
()
36
;
37
38
data
SupportedType
=
Natural
()
|
Integer
()
|
Real
()
|
String
()
|
Boolean
()
|
UART
();
39
40
data
Strategy
41
=
Last
()
42
|
Next
()
43
|
Mean
()
44
|
Median
()
45
|
Constant
(
str
c
)
46
|
Interpolation
(
str
method
)
47
;
Listing 8:
The abstract syntax definition of
CPSLint
.
The parsing infrastructure is rather straightforward: we first parse the
CPSLint
programs as a concrete syntax tree, then implode it into a more workable abstract syntax tree. The abstract syntax tree is then passed to the selected back-end for the current run.
4.2
Ad hoc Python sanitisation
As both our inspiration and the actual use-case in which
CPSLint
is a suitable replacement for some of the stages, a Python project
[
Odyurt:2021:CAMA
]
containing multiple configurable workflows, composed of sequential pipeline stages, can be presented. Details of the monitoring data format and fields relevant to this use-case have been elaborated in
Section
˜
2
. The project provides alternative anomaly detection and identification solutions for industrial CPS, based on traditional ML algorithms and CNN deep neural networks.
Figure
˜
4
covers three of these workflows, which prepare and process data for ML dataset formation. The follow-up workflows using these datasets and performing actual model training or inference, are not included, as there is no need for
CPSLint
’s functionality at those stages.
(a)
Solution workflow processing normal system data, intended for traditional ML dataset formation.
(b)
Solution workflow processing anomalous system data, intended for traditional ML dataset formation.
(c)
Solution workflow processing system data, intended for CNN dataset formation.
Figure 4
:
Different workflows involving parsing and cutting of industrial CPS monitoring data: Traditional ML model training dataset formation flow handling a)
“Normal”
data and b)
“Anomalous”
data; c) CNN model training dataset formation flow. Note the presence of parsing and cutting in all such workflows as fundamental and repeating data processing stages.
In short,
Figures
˜
4(a)
and
4(b)
depict the data processing steps for processing data representing normal and anomalous system activity for traditional ML training. On the other hand,
Figure
˜
4(c)
does the same, but for a CNN model design. As it can be seen, all three workflows involve
parsing
and
cutting
(compartmentalisation) of the data. These tasks match the functionality provided by
CPSLint
, i.e., machine trace ingestion, sanitisation, and compartmentalisation. As these steps are commonly present not only in these workflows, but in general most workflows processing industrial CPS data, the need for reusable tools such as
CPSLint
is apparent.
4.3
The compiler back-end
The compiler back-end takes the parsed abstract syntax tree and generates the corresponding Python code from it. This code is then run, producing the processed CSV file.
The compiler generates Python code that performs the operations described in the
CPSLint
input. The generated code leverages existing Python data science libraries such as Pandas, NumPy, and SciPy, enabling the compiler to produce high-performance, relatively compact code. Each code fragment generated by the compiler is preceded by a short description of its purpose. This can be seen in the example programs and their generated code shown in
Section
˜
3.3
. Users can thus relate the generated code to the original
CPSLint
specification and make changes to either the
CPSLint
program or the generated Python code if the compiled code does not match their expectations.
The pipeline for this back-end is illustrated in
Figure
˜
5
. The figure starts with an
inspect
script, which generates a script describing the input dataset in its unprocessed form. The compiler generates a Python script that in turn generates a baseline
CPSLint
specification for the dataset. This is done with the help of the Pandas library, which is used to infer column names and types. The domain expert then refines the baseline script by adding how
CPSLint
should sanitise the dataset. This refined input is then compiled into a Python script, which is in turn run to output a sanitised version of the dataset.
Figure 5
:
A tombstone diagram of the
CPSLint
compiler pipeline. Activities flow rightwards, with inspection and inferring of the data structure happening on the left side, followed by Python code generation to deliver the executable code operating on the actual machine trace. Ellipses indicate where the normal data processing flow connects. Note the role of a domain expert refining the inferred
CPSLint
specification.
4.4
The interpreter back-end
The interpreter back-end directly interprets the
CPSLint
code, performing the operations defined in the input using Rascal itself and thus forgoing compilation to Python entirely. This method of running
CPSLint
relies on our runtime library written in Rascal and thus cannot make use of the more mature, well-performing data science libraries available for Python, and therefore suffers a significant performance penalty. What this back-end does offer, however, is greater insight into the individual steps
CPSLint
takes while executing the input script. It does so by outputting an intermediate CSV after each operation, and by producing a timestamped log detailing the steps taken to perform the data sanitisation at runtime. An example of such a log file is given in
LABEL:lst:log
.
⬇
1
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
4
.
5
9
7
|
[
IO
]
Created
intermediate
CSV
for
Import
action
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
import_filters_applied
.
csv
2
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
4
.
6
2
7
|
[
ImportFilter
]
Skipping
empty
rows
3
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
7
.
0
1
9
|
[
RuntimeLib
]
Saved
new
intermediate
csv
after
applying
skipEmptyRows
at
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
import_filters_applied_skipEmptyRows
.
csv
4
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
7
.
0
5
3
|
[
RuntimeLib
]
Updated
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
import_filters_applied
.
csv
after
applying
skipEmptyRows
5
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
7
.
0
5
4
|
[
ImportFilter
]
Skipped
empty
rows
6
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
2
5
:
3
7
.
0
5
5
|
[
IO
]
CSV
used
for
Export
:
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
import_filters_applied
.
csv
7
...
8
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
1
:
2
8
.
7
6
2
|
[
ColumnFilters
]
Enforced
type
real
on
column
"
energy
"
9
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
1
:
2
8
.
7
6
2
|
[
ColumnFilters
]
Emptying
cells
in
energy
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
0
.
and
4
0
0
.,
with
inclusive
set
to
neither
10
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
2
:
3
5
.
5
6
3
|
[
RuntimeLib
]
Wrote
file
where
column
"
energy
"
only
has
values
in
range
between
0
.
and
4
0
0
.,
with
inclusive
set
to
neither
to
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
export_filters_applied_energy_range_applied
.
csv
11
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
2
:
3
5
.
6
3
2
|
[
RuntimeLib
]
Updated
~/
data
/
output
/
intermediate
/
export_filters_applied
.
csv
after
enforcing
range
(
0
.
and
4
0
0
.,
inclusive
:
neither
)
on
column
"
energy
"
12
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
2
:
3
5
.
6
3
3
|
[
ColumnFilters
]
emptied
cells
in
energy
that
are
not
in
the
range
between
0
.
and
4
0
0
.,
with
inclusive
set
to
neither
13
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
2
:
3
5
.
6
3
3
|
[
IO
]
Applied
column
filters
14
2
0
2
6
-
0
4
-
0
8
1
5
:
3
2
:
3
5
.
6
4
0
|
[
IO
]
Saved
final
result
to
~/
data
/
output
/
out_of_bounds_fixed
.
csv
Listing 9:
A truncated example of the log produced by the interpreter back-end
Figure 6
:
A tombstone diagram of the
CPSLint
interpreter: the presence of the interpreter (vertical block) of
CPSLint
written in Rascal allows us to see
CPSLint
specifications as transformations from raw CSV to its sanitised form.
The tombstone diagram for using
CPSLint
with the interpreter back-end is shown in
Figure
˜
6
. Like with the compiler back-end the process starts with providing
CPSLint
with an
inspect
script, which again generates a baseline
CPSLint
script. This back-end uses
lang
::
csv
from the Rascal standard library for type inference of the column names and types, thereby matching the functionality from the
inspect
implementation from the compiler. The domain expert again refines the baseline script and runs this through the interpreter, which in this case outputs a sanitised CSV as its main output. alongside the main out the interpreter also writes the log, and creates intermediate files after each step the interpreter performs during the execution.
4.5
Integration into pipelines
Considering the flows from
Figure
˜
4
, parsing and cutting stages in any of these, or any other time-series processing flow for that matter, can be replaced by the functionality provided by
CPSLint
. As described at the start of this section,
CPSLint
support two modes of operation: as a compiler and as an interpreter. Diagrams in
Figure
˜
7
present how the replacement and integration of
CPSLint
can be conceived.
(a)
CPSLint
flow in compiler mode.
(b)
CPSLint
flow in interpreter mode.
Figure 7
:
Integration options considering the two modes of operation offered by
CPSLint
, i.e., a) compiler and b) interpreter modes.
As described in
Section
˜
3
, the interpreter mode is primarily intended for debugging and diagnostic purposes. The computational cost incurred and the I/O-heavy design will render this mode as inadequate for production. Regardless, a systematic integration that can be driven with an orchestrator is shown in
Figure
˜
7(b)
, mainly through a pseudoterminal (PTY) and a Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL) interface.
The compiler mode on the other hand, could be seamlessly integrated with any workflow, as the orchestrator only has to drive Python scripts generated by
CPSLint
(
Figure
˜
7(a)
).
5
Related work
CPSLint
was implemented in Rascal, which is just one of the language workbenches available today
[
Erdweg:2015:ECLW
]
. What is specific to Rascal is that it combines the role of meta-programming language and language workbench, with explicit support for source-code analysis and transformation
[
Klint:2009:RDSL
]
. Its design brings together grammar definition, algebraic data types, pattern matching, tree traversal, and source-location-aware manipulation in a single executable environment
[
Klint:2011:EMPR
]
. Among contemporary language workbenches, this places Rascal on the textual side, but with a particularly strong emphasis on programmable analyses and transformations
[
Erdweg:2015:ECLW
]
.
Among the tools for data wrangling, sanitisation and compartmentalisation, we recognise the following notable examples, each providing various sets of features.
GNU datamash
[
GNU:2025:Datamash
]
is a command-line tool that performs basic numeric, textual, and statistical operations on textual data. While it is not a fully-fledged DSL, it is suitable for handling basic manipulation and analysis on the input. Compared to
CPSLint
, it provides general-purpose command-line operations rather than a domain-specific notation for sanitising and compartmentalising industrial time-series data.
Lisp Query Notation
[
Hoff:2024:LQND
]
is an embedded DSL in Common Lisp that can operate on CSV data as well as structured formats such as JSON. It allows users to query and manipulate textual data both as a DSL and as a command-line tool. Being embedded in Common Lisp enables users to extend its functionality and makes it possible to fall back on Lisp when the DSL is limiting for certain operations. It is more host-language-extensible and in general broader than
CPSLint
with its small declarative vocabulary tailored to sanitisation, imputation, and compartmentalisation.
DescribeML
[
Giner-Miguelez:2023:DSLD
]
is a DSL designed to precisely describe machine learning datasets in terms of their structure, provenance, and social concerns, with the aim of providing a method for dataset documentation based on their characteristics, thereby helping data scientists select the appropriate dataset for a given project. DescribeML is implemented using Langium and has been published as a Visual Studio Code extension. Unlike
CPSLint
, it targets dataset description and documentation rather than executable preprocessing of raw traces.
RADAR
[
Heine:2020:DADQ
]
is a DSL built for data quality monitoring. RADAR’s capabilities include simple checks like making sure there are no null values, data integrity checks and statistical checks like conformance of the data to a certain distribution. This DSL is made up of 3 types of definitions; sources (referring to the input data), checks (which act like functions that accept parameters), and actions (which apply the checks on data from a source and define what should be reported for the resulting values). In contrast to
CPSLint
, RADAR emphasises monitoring and reporting of data quality rather than transforming corrupted data into sanitised output datasets.
Lavoisier
[
DeLaVega:2020:LDIL
]
is a DSL that helps with creation of datasets that conform to the format accepted by data mining algorithms. It is meant to reduce script size compared to accomplishing the same result using other ways to prepare data such as SQL and Pandas. Its focus is broader dataset preparation for data mining without the CPS focus.
Papin
[
Sal:2024:DSLA
]
is a spin-off DSL of Lavoisier that specialises further and makes it compatible with fishbone diagrams, a notation used by industrial engineers to model cause and effect. For the Papin pipeline the authors introduce a new fishbone diagram kind called data-oriented fishbone diagrams which combines domain data (defined using Lavoisier expressions) with standard fishbone diagrams. These diagrams then are used as input for the Papin specification.
Jet
[
Ackermann:2012:JEDH
]
is an embedded DSL in written in Scala which is meant to be used for batch processing of large datasets. This DSL can generate code for both Apache Spark and Apache Hadoop, both of which are systems for processing big data. The compiler, relational, and domain-specific optimisations of the implementation provide substantial performance gains compared to the naive handwritten processing code. Compared to
CPSLint
, Jet is much more focused on high performance.
DSL4DPiFS
[
Vogel-Heuser:2025:GNMD
]
is a graphical DSL to help with deploying data pipelines in industrial metal forming systems, built with interdisciplinary collaboration in mind. These data-pipelines used to enable process optimisation, quality management, and predictive maintenance of these systems. For
CPSLint
, we consider the data-pipeline to be an external factor where
CPSLint
-produced code gets integrated.
KNIME
[
Berthold:2009:KNIME
]
is a graphical platform for building data processing and analytics workflows from interconnected nodes. It supports a broad range of data integration, transformation, analysis, and visualisation tasks in a general-purpose workflow environment. KNIME offers substantially broader workflow support than
CPSLint
but also requires a longer learning time.
Table
˜
1
shows the position of
CPSLint
relative to prior work. The comparison indicates that the related tools and DSLs overlap with
CPSLint
only partially. Some focus on querying, some on monitoring, some on documentation, optimisation, or deployment, but none combines declarative sanitisation, imputation, and compartmentalisation for industrial CPS time-series data in the same way, and only one covers a form of data imputation.
Table 1
:
Comparison of supported functionality amongst existing tools/DSLs and with
CPSLint
in the last row. The considered markings and their meanings are: ●= supported, ◐= unclear/partially supported, and ○= unsupported.
Tool/DSL
Imputation
Type inference
Filtering
Statistical analysis
Data restructuring
GNU datamash
○
○
○
●
●
Lisp Query Notation
○
○
●
○
●
DescribeML
○
●
○
○
○
RADAR
○
◐
●
●
◐
Lavoisier
○
●
◐
○
●
Jet
○
○
◐
○
●
DSL4DPiFS
○
◐
○
○
◐
KNIME
◐
◐
●
●
●
CPSLint
●
●
●
○
●
6
Conclusion and future work
We have elaborated the design and implementation of
CPSLint
, a custom DSL written in th Rascal language workbench. Our DSL is intended to facilitate data sanitisation and compartmentalisation in industrial CPS use-cases, where workflows process data collections in time-series format. We have provided a examples of such workflows, in which data parsing, data cutting and ad hoc data sanitisation stages can be collectively replaced by processing through
CPSLint
.
CPSLint
as a tool and in its integrated form with workflows from
Section
˜
4
, can be considered as both a
proof of concept
and a
proof of integration
(based on the definitions by Odyurt et al.
[
Odyurt:2026:DICP
]
) for the ZORRO project .
In its current form,
CPSLint
is a self-contained tool with sufficient functionality for our demonstration. It can also be easily extended and adapted to the needs of other use-cases, for instance by defining different data headers, or by implementing extra data imputation methods. Such additions can be considered as future extensions.
Acknowledgements.
This publication is part of the project
ZORRO
with project number KICH1.ST02.21.003 of the research programme Key Enabling Technologies (KIC), which is (partly) financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO).
{aideclaration}
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT-5.X in order to perform grammar and spelling checks. Further, the authors used ChatGPT Codex for setting up the CEURART template. After using these tools, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the publication’s content.
References
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA