Co-evolution of bar and spiral arms in TNG50 simulations using Information Theory
Report GitHub Issue
├Ś
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
Bar and spiral arm parameters
III
Sample
IV
Theory
IV.1
Mutual Information Theory (MI)
IV.2
Transfer Entropy
IV.3
Information Flow
V
Results & discussion
V.1
Mutual Information
V.2
Transfer Entropy & Information Flow
V.3
Angular Momentum Exchange between the bar and the spiral arm
VI
Conclusions
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2606.16403v2 [astro-ph.GA] 16 Jun 2026
Co-evolution of bar and spiral arms in TNG50 simulations using Information Theory
Anagha A G
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Tirupati, Tirupati - 517619, India
anaghaag@students.iisertirupati.ac.in
Arunima Banerjee
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Tirupati, Tirupati - 517619, India
arunima.iisert@gmail.com
Abstract
Using Information Theory, we investigate the co-evolution of bars and spiral arms in barred-spiral galaxies from the cosmological magneto-hydrodynamic Illustris TNG50 simulations. We first calculate Mutual Information (MI) between a structural or kinematic parameter of the bar (bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
, bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
, bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
) and that of a spiral arm (spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
). We calculate MI in two different galaxy samples: (i) one forming bars before spirals (ii) other forming spirals before bars. We note, spirals form immediately after bars in the first sample, whereas bars form 1.7 Gyrs after spirals in the second. We find a high mean MI value in each of these samples (0.4 - 0.5), and in the combined sample (0.4-0.8), confirming a fair degree of association of the bar and the spiral arm. To identify whether the bar or the spiral arm effectively drives their co-evolution, we calculate the Transfer Entropy (TE) (bar-to-spiral TE, spiral-to-bar TE), from the time series data of each of the above bar-spiral parameter pairs. We find that the median bar-to-spiral TE and spiral-to-bar TE values vary between
0.33
0.33
and
0.42
0.42
for each galaxy sample, comparable to those of the combined sample. A similar trend was observed in our calculated Liang information flow rates. Our novel approach may possibly indicate that the bar and the spiral arm regulate their co-evolution on an equal footing.
galaxies: evolution galaxies: structure galaxies: spiral galaxies: bars galaxies: kinematics and dynamics methods: statistical
I
Introduction
More than half of the spiral galaxies are barred-spirals, and our galaxy, the Milky Way itself, is a classic example of a barred-spiral galaxy. These non-axisymmetric structures, bars and spiral arms, play an important role in the secular evolution of galaxies (
Burton
1988
,
Benjamin
et al.
2005
,
Dame
et al.
2001
). The quadrupole moment
associated with the gravitational potential of the non-
axisymmetric disk components like bars and spiral arms helps in angular momentum transport (
Lynden-Bell and Kalnajs
1972
,
Sellwood and Binney
2002
), and hence in gas inflow, thus fueling star formation activity (
Friedli and Martinet
1993
,
Aguerri
1999
,
Silva-Lima
et al.
2022
,
Storchi-Bergmann and Schnorr-M├╝ller
2019
,
Kataria and Vivek
2023
,
Garland
et al.
2024
,
Vogel
et al.
1988
,
Kim and Ostriker
2002
). In addition, being an overdense region in a smooth and homogenous disk, they scatter stars off their orbits and hence lead to heating the stellar disk, which enhances the disk dynamical stability (
Fujii
et al.
2011
,
Aditya and Banerjee
2025
).
According to the Density Wave Theory, the bars and spirals are formed by the density waves and grow by the mechanism of swing amplification (
Binney and Tremaine
1987
). Besides, bars can be associated with spiral arms and may themselves drive the spiral density waves (
Binney and Tremaine
1987
). A strong dynamical coupling between bars and spiral arms is also predicted by the manifold theory, which is an alternative framework for understanding the formation of spirals and rings (
Romero-G├│mez
et al.
2007
,
Patsis
2006
,
Voglis
et al.
2006
,
Athanassoula
et al.
2009
). The stellar dynamics in the galactic bar is nonlinear, sustained by mostly chaotic orbits (
Sellwood and Wilkinson
1993
). The Lagrangian associated with the bar potential plays an important role in the dynamics of these stellar orbits. Non-axisymmetric bar potentials have two unstable points (L1, L2), and two other points (L4, L5) (
Contopoulos and Grosbol
1989
). The unstable Lagrange points L1 and L2, located at the ends of the bar, are responsible for the formation of spirals, and also strong bars have more unstable Lagrangian points compared to weak bars (
Athanassoula
et al.
2009
). The chaotic orbits in the corotation region of the strongly-barred galaxies constitute the main building blocks of the spiral arms (
Mondal and Chattopadhyay
2021
).
The bar can be modelled as a global, density wave mode with
m
=
2
m=2
, mostly in the region of the disk with a solid-body rotation curve (
Sellwood and Wilkinson
1993
). A large bar strength corresponds to a large quadrupole moment associated with its gravitational potential, which excites spiral density waves outside the corotation and shapes the orbital families. Also, the bar strength indicates how strongly a bar can trap stars on the elongated
x
1
x_{1}
family of orbits, which supports the bar and induces chaos. Stronger bars exert greater tangential forces, influence the transfer of angular momentum within the disk
(Laurikainen
et al.
,
2004
; Das
et al.
,
2008
)
and drive more prominent resonances in the galactic disks (Inner Lindblad ILR, Corotation CR, Outer Lindblad OLR). This, in turn, regulates the angular momentum redistribution among the bar, the disk, and the halo. This angular momentum redistribution drives gas inflows towards the galactic centre, potentially fueling central star formation and active galactic nuclei (AGN) activity
(Oh
et al.
,
2011
; D├Łaz-Garc├Ła, S.
et al.
,
2019
; Newnham
et al.
,
2020
; George, K.
et al.
,
2019
; Hogarth
et al.
,
2024
; Galloway
et al.
,
2015
)
. More passive galaxies often host longer bars
(Fraser-McKelvie
et al.
,
2019
)
. The growth of bars, in terms of length and strength, has been studied in numerical simulations. As the host galaxy evolves, the bar radius increases at a pace comparable to that of the disk scale length (
Rosas-Guevara
et al.
2022
).
Romeo
et al.
(
2022
)
found that galaxies hosting long bars tend to have lower specific angular momentum values compared to those with short bars or unbarred galaxies. It is now well-known that galactic bars rotate about the galactic centre like a solid body with a constant pattern speed
╬®
p
\Omega_{p}
. If
╬®
p
\Omega_{p}
is too high or too low, the
x
1
x_{1}
orbits lose their coherence
(Contopoulos and Grosbol,
1989
)
. The magnitude of
╬®
p
\Omega_{p}
is regulated by the dark matter mass fraction in the inner regions of host galaxies, as dark matter can slow down bars through dynamical friction
(Weinberg,
1985
)
. This slowing indicates angular momentum transfer via resonances to the halo and outer disk. Interestingly, studies of bars produced in ILLUSTRIS TNG50 indicate that the median value of pattern speed increases with redshift
(Semczuk, Marcin
et al.
,
2024
; Habibi
et al.
,
2024
)
The spiral arm can also be looked upon as a global stationary wave with
m
=
2
m=2
, but in the sheared disk
(Lin and Shu,
1964
)
. The pitch angle (
╬▒
\alpha
), which quantifies the tightness of the winding of the spiral arm, is defined as the angle between the tangent to a spiral arm and a circle of constant radius from the galactic centre (
Davis
2013
;
Michikoshi and Kokubo
2014
). A smaller pitch angle indicates more tightly wound spiral arms, while a larger angle indicates more open structures
(Davis,
2013
)
. For instance, the pitch angle tends to decrease (i.e., arms are more tightly wound) in galaxies with earlier Hubble types, more prominent bulges, higher stellar concentration, and larger total stellar masses (
M
ŌłŚ
gal
M_{\ast}^{\rm gal}
). In the Lin-Shu density wave theory, the pitch angle is expected to remain constant over time, reflecting an inherent property of the underlying galaxy
(Pringle and Dobbs,
2019
)
. Conversely, theories involving tidal interactions or self-gravity predict that spiral arms should wind up over time. Both observational data and
N
N
-body simulations indicate a correlation between pitch angle and galactic shear rate
(Grand
et al.
,
2013
)
, which describes how differential rotation stretches material in the disk. Stronger spiral arms, i.e., spiral features with large enough amplitude of the
m
=
2
m=2
mode, are more effective at driving gas towards the galactic centre and inducing star formation
(Seo and Kim,
2014
; Yu
et al.
,
2021
)
. Hydrodynamic simulations show that spiral arms can efficiently transport gas from the outskirts to central nuclear rings, provided the arms rotate more slowly than the bar, thereby enhancing star formation in those regions
(Seo and Kim,
2014
)
. The impact of spiral structure on global star formation has been investigated, showing that arm strength correlates well with variations in star formation rate (SFR) as a function of stellar mass
(Yu
et al.
,
2021
)
. Stronger arms are found in galaxies above the star-forming main sequence, suggesting that spiral structures boost star formation
(Yu
et al.
,
2021
)
.
Numerous studies have examined the correlation between various bar and spiral parameters in galaxies. Theoretical calculations suggest that the central mass concentration and the galactic shear influence the pitch angle of spiral arms. The galactic shear is most closely associated with the bar pattern speed (
Garma-Oehmichen
et al.
2021
) and bar strength (
Schwarz
1984
). Interestingly, observational studies indicate that the distribution of pitch angles for barred and unbarred-spiral galaxies is similar (
Voglis
et al.
2006
), and bar-induced gravitational torque and pitch angle are not correlated (
Garc├Ła_2019
Garc├Ła_2019
). Other studies have revealed that the strength of the spiral arms correlates well with the quadrupole moment of the gravitational potential of the bar (
Garma-Oehmichen
et al.
2021
) and tangential force exerted by the bar(
Salo
et al.
2010
,
Garc├Ła_2019
Garc├Ła_2019
). Finally, though stronger spirals are associated with stronger bars in general, two strongly barred galaxies (NGC 7513 and UGC 10862) exhibit weak spiral amplitudes (
Schwarz
1984
,
Buta
et al.
2009
). Bars might play a role in creating spirals (
Sanders and Huntley
1976
), but mainly in strongly barred galaxies (
Sellwood and Sparke
1988
). The spiral arms are a result of spiral density waves, which could be driven by bars.
Despite extensive theoretical and observational studies, several key questions remain unresolved: whether bars and spirals are dynamically coupled, which bar and spiral properties are most strongly linked, whether these relationships are linear or nonlinear, and whether any directional influence exists between their temporal evolutions. These unresolved issues directly motivate the use of information-theoretic methods in the present work. In this paper, we use Information Theory to study the interdependence between the different pairs of physical parameters of the bar (bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
, bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
, bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
) and the spiral arm (strength of the spiral arm,
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, pitch angle of spiral arm
╬©
\Psi
) in the barred-spiral galaxy sample from the TNG50 cosmological magneto-hydrodynamical simulation (
Nelson
et al.
2019b
,
Pillepich
et al.
2019
). Information Theory provides a framework for identifying relationships, including nonlinear dependencies, between variables. Several techniques have been developed using Information Theory to determine the relationships between two random variables. One such technique is
Mutual Information
(MI), which is a model-free method that quantifies the information one random variable can reveal about another (
Cover and Thomas
2006
). We use MI to study the relation between the physical parameters of the bar and the spiral arm. To assess causal interactions and the direction of the flow of information, we calculate Transfer Entropy (TE). TE is a concept that retains some of the properties of MI and also encapsulates the dynamics of information transfer
(Schreiber,
2000
)
. We quantify the exchange of information between the pair of bar and spiral arm parameters in both directions using TE. Further, we calculate Liang information flow rate (IFR), which also measures the transfer of information between the time series of a pair of bar and spiral parameters (
Liang and Kleeman
2005
,
Liang
2008
,
Liang
2013
,
Liang
2014
,
Liang
2015
). To our best knowledge, it is the first such attempt in the study of barred spiral galaxies.
The paper is organised as follows: In ┬¦2, we introduce the bar and spiral parameters considered in this study, and in ┬¦3, we present our galaxy sample. In ┬¦4, we describe Information Theory techniques used for analysis; in ┬¦5, we present the results and discussion, followed by conclusions in ┬¦6.
II
Bar and spiral arm parameters
Bar-Strength:
We decompose the face-on stellar surface density into a Fourier series (
Athanassoula and Misiriotis
2002
).
╬Ż
ŌĆŗ
(
r
,
╬Ė
)
=
Ōłæ
m
=
0
,
1
,
2
,
3
ŌĆŗ
ŌĆ”
A
m
ŌĆŗ
(
r
)
ŌĆŗ
e
i
ŌĆŗ
m
ŌĆŗ
╬Ė
\Sigma(r,\theta)=\sum_{m=0,1,2,3...}A_{m}(r)e^{im\theta}
(1)
The ratio of the amplitude of the second order and zero
th
order terms of the Fourier expansion given by
A
2
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
=
|
╬Ż
j
ŌĆŗ
m
j
ŌĆŗ
e
2
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
╬Ė
j
|
╬Ż
j
ŌĆŗ
m
j
A_{2}(R)=\frac{|\Sigma_{j}m_{j}e^{2i\theta_{j}}|}{\Sigma_{j}m_{j}}
(2)
The bar strength is value of the peak of
A
2
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
A_{2}(R)
(
A
2
ŌĆŗ
m
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
x
A_{2}{max}
)
and phase of bar
╬”
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
\Phi(R)
is given by
╬”
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
=
1
2
ŌĆŗ
arctan
ŌĆŗ
[
╬Ż
j
ŌĆŗ
m
j
ŌĆŗ
sin
ŌĆŗ
(
2
ŌĆŗ
╬Ė
j
)
╬Ż
j
ŌĆŗ
m
j
ŌĆŗ
cos
ŌĆŗ
(
2
ŌĆŗ
╬Ė
j
)
]
,
\Phi(R)=\frac{1}{2}{\rm arctan}\bigg[\frac{\Sigma_{j}m_{j}{\rm sin}(2\theta_{j})}{\Sigma_{j}m_{j}\rm{cos}(2\theta_{j})}\bigg],
(3)
where
m
j
m_{j}
is the mass of the jth particle, and
╬Ė
j
\theta_{j}
is the azimuthal angle. To compute
A
2
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
A_{2}(R)
and
╬”
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
\Phi(R)
, summations are performed over all the stellar particles within an annulus of radial width
╬ö
ŌĆŗ
r
=
0.1
ŌĆŗ
k
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
c
\Delta r=0.1\,kpc
.
Bar-length:
Bars in the galactic disks have a constant phase angle. Hence, the phase
╬”
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
\Phi(R)
should remain constant inside the bar radius, but in simulations, it deviates. Let
Žā
\sigma
be the standard deviation of
╬”
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
\Phi(R)
. The bar length (
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
) is the radius at which
Žā
\sigma
is less than or equal to 0.1 (
Rosas-Guevara
et al.
2022
).
Bar-pattern speed:
Being a density wave, the bars rotate about the galactic centre with a constant pattern speed like a rigid body. To measure the bar pattern speed
╬®
p
\Omega_{\mathrm{p}}
, we use the Python code
patternSpeed.py
(
Dehnen
et al.
2023
), version 0.5.3. In the code, we manually input the parameters of the bar region, such as the centre of the bar, the bar radius obtained from the Fourier analysis and measure the pattern speed corresponding to the
m
=
2
m=2
mode.
Spiral amplitude:
Here, we use the value of the peak of
A
2
ŌĆŗ
(
R
)
A_{2}(R)
at R greater than the bar radius to quantify the spiral amplitude.
Pitch angle of spiral arms:
We determine the
pitch angle
(
╬©
\Psi
) of spiral arms using the publicly available code
P2DFFT
(parallelized two-dimensional fast Fourier transform algorithm) (
Mutlu-Pakdil
et al.
2017
,
Hewitt and Treuthardt
2020
). In two-armed spirals, the spiral pattern is often logarithmic in nature (
Seigar and James
1998
). The logarithmic spiral can be written in polar coordinates
(
r
,
╬Ė
)
(r,\theta)
as follows:
r
ŌĆŗ
(
╬Ė
)
=
R
Ōŗģ
e
╬Ė
ŌĆŗ
tan
ŌüĪ
ŽĢ
r(\theta)=R\cdot e^{\theta\tan\phi}
(4)
where
╬Ė
=
0
\theta=0
at
r
=
R
Ōłł
ŌäØ
r=R\in\mathbb{R}
and
ŽĢ
\phi
is the pitch angle. P2DFFT decomposes galaxy images into logarithmic spirals and determines the pitch angle that maximizes the Fourier amplitudes for each harmonic mode (m). In P2DFFT, we input a FITS image of stellar surface density in face-on orientation and choose the m=2 mode in which pitch-angle is constant over the larger radius range, and measure pitch angle by averaging over this radius range.
III
Sample
The IllustrisTNG (The Next Generation) project (
Nelson
et al.
2019b
,
Nelson
et al.
2019a
,
Pillepich
et al.
2019
) is a cosmological, gravitomagnetic-hydrodynamical simulation of galaxy formation, in which simulations run with the moving-mesh
AREPO
code (
Springel
2010
). The run TNG50-1 has the highest resolution with a typical stellar particle mass of
8.5
├Ś
10
4
ŌĆŗ
M
ŌŖÖ
8.5\times 10^{4}\,M_{\odot}
and a gravitational softening length of 288ŌĆēpc. This study focuses on a sample of barred-spiral galaxies from the TNG50-1 run of the IllustrisTNG suite of simulations.
Different aspects of bars in TNG50-1 were previously studied by
Rosas-Guevara
et al.
(
2022
),
Frankel
et al.
(
2022
),
Izquierdo-Villalba
et al.
2022
),
Zana
et al.
(
2022
),
Ansar and Das
(
2023
),
L├│pez
et al.
(
2024
),
Rosas-Guevara
et al.
(
2024
). In this study, we focus on the barred galaxy samples identified in
Zana
et al.
(
2022
)
, which consist of disk galaxies with a stellar mass greater than or equal to
10
9
ŌĆŗ
M
ŌŖÖ
10^{9}M_{\odot}
. We consider 750 barred galaxy samples at redshift z=0. To identify the galaxies with well-defined spiral arms, we project the stellar disk in face-on orientation by rotating the galaxy so that the z-axis aligns with the direction of the total angular momentum of the stellar component. After visually inspecting 2-dimensional plots of stellar surface density in face-on orientation, we chose a sample of barred-spiral galaxies with two-arm spirals. In Figure
1
, we show composite stellar images in a face-on orientation using JWST filters [f200w, f115w, f070w]. In the TNG simulations, as the galaxies evolve, some undergo merger events; as a result, non-axisymmetric structures get disrupted, and some evolve into lenticular galaxies. We track these galaxies and identify their progenitors within the redshift range
2
<
z
<
0
2<z<0
, removing those that exhibit large deformation in their stellar disks due to ongoing mergers/flyby events. With the above criteria imposed, we have a sample of
101
101
barred galaxies at redshift
z
=
0
z=0
.
We classify the galaxies further into two groups based on whether the bar or spiral arm appears first in the stellar disk. Figures (
2
) and (
3
) show two of our sample galaxies and the epochs at which the bars and spiral arms formed in the stellar disks. In Table
1
we present the number of galaxy samples in each group and the median time difference between the formation of the bar and the spiral arm in the stellar disk. Interestingly, we note that in the first group, where the bar precedes the spirals, the spiral arms form almost immediately after the bars, whereas in the second group, where the spiral precedes the bar, the bars form about
1.7
1.7
Gyrs after the spirals. Figure
4
shows the cumulative distribution of time difference between the appearance of the bar and the spiral arm in the stellar disk of two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue). Other structural properties, such as the central mass concentration, may potentially influence this behaviour. To study this, we have analyzed dark matter mass, stellar mass, and scale radius of the stellar disk for two groups of galaxies, as shown in Figure
5
. However, we find no significant differences between the galaxies that bar precedes spiral, and spiral precedes bar with respect to these quantities.
The time difference in the formation of bar and spiral structures within a stellar disc may depend on the galaxyŌĆÖs formation history. Additionally, this difference could be influenced by one of the non-axisymmetric structures, which could be affecting the growth of the other. An early bar might trigger or enhance spiral structures, or existing spiral instabilities, delaying the subsequent formation of a bar.
In Figure
6
, we show the evolution of bar length, bar strength and pattern speed for a barred spiral galaxy at redshift z=0 (ID: 394621).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1:
Examples of barred-spiral galaxies at redshift
z
=
0
z=0
from the TNG50 simulation. Each panel shows composite stellar images using JWST filters [
f
ŌĆŗ
200
ŌĆŗ
w
f200w
,
f
ŌĆŗ
115
ŌĆŗ
w
f115w
,
f
ŌĆŗ
070
ŌĆŗ
w
f070w
] in a face-on orientation.
Figure 2:
Evolution of the barred-spiral galaxy (ID 505101, z=0) in the TNG50 simulation. In this galaxy, the spiral arm is formed before the bar (spiral arm precedes bar). Each panel shows a face-on composite stellar image using JWST bands [F070W (blue), F115W (green), F200W (red)] at different redshifts (Z). (a) z=1.5, (b) z=0.42 (epoch at which bar is formed), (c) z=2.2 (epoch at which spiral arm is formed), and (d) z=0.
Figure 3:
Evolution of the barred-spiral galaxy (ID 394621, z=0) in the TNG50 simulation. In this galaxy, a bar forms before the spiral arm (bar precedes spiral). Each panel shows a face-on composite stellar image using JWST bands [F070W (blue), F115W (green), F200W (red)] at different redshifts (Z). (a) z=3.3, (b) z=2.7 (epoch at which bar is formed), (c) z=2.2 (epoch at which spiral arm is formed), and (d) z=0.
Table 1:
Median time interval between bar and spiral arm formation for different evolutionary sequences
Galaxy sample
Number
╬ö
ŌĆŗ
t
\Delta t
(Gyr)
Bar precedes spiral arm
51
0.00
spiral arm precedes bar
50
1.7
Figure 4:
Cumulative distribution of time difference between appearance of bar and spiral arm in stellar disk of two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue). Dashed lines mark the median of each distribution, and the KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov test p-value is indicated within the figure.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5:
(a) Dark matter mass and stellar mass. (b) Scale radius and stellar mass for the two groups of galaxies, bar precedes spiral (green) and spiral precedes bar (blue).
IV
Theory
IV.1
Mutual Information Theory (MI)
The field of Information Theory was established and formalized by Claude Shannon in the 1940s (
Shannon
1948
). A fundamental parameter in this field is information entropy (Shannon entropy), which quantifies the amount of uncertainty associated with the value of a random variable or the outcome of a random process.
Consider two parameters
X
X
(
X
Ōłł
{
x
i
:
i
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
x
}
X\in\{x_{i}:i=1,....N_{x}\}
) and
Y
Y
(
Y
Ōłł
{
y
j
:
j
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
y
}
Y\in\{y_{j}:j=1,....N_{y}\}
) with
N
x
N_{x}
and
N
y
N_{y}
data points respectively (Here
N
x
=
N
y
N_{x}=N_{y}
and are number of galaxies in our sample). Let X be a parameter of the bar, and Y be a parameter of the spiral arm. We divide the available values of X and Y into
N
d
N_{d}
bins. The probability of finding a randomly selected parameter value in the
i
t
ŌĆŗ
h
i^{th}
bin is
p
ŌĆŗ
(
X
i
)
=
N
i
N
\displaystyle p(X_{i})=\frac{N_{i}}{N}
(5)
where
N
i
N_{i}
is the number of observables of X in the
i
t
ŌĆŗ
h
i^{th}
bin and
N
N
is the total number of galaxies. The information entropy (
Shannon
1948
) associated with the random variable
X
X
is given by
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
)
\displaystyle H(X)
=
\displaystyle=
ŌłÆ
Ōłæ
i
=
1
N
d
p
ŌĆŗ
(
X
i
)
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
p
ŌĆŗ
(
X
i
)
\displaystyle-\sum_{i=1}^{N_{d}}p(X_{i})\log p(X_{i})
(6)
Here, the logarithms are to base 2.
Similarly, the Shannon entropy for variable Y is given as,
H
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
)
\displaystyle H(Y)
=
\displaystyle=
ŌłÆ
Ōłæ
i
=
1
N
d
p
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
i
)
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
p
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
i
)
\displaystyle-\sum_{i=1}^{N_{d}}p(Y_{i})\log p(Y_{i})
(7)
The joint entropy
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
,
Y
)
H(X,Y)
on the other hand, is given as
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
,
Y
)
\displaystyle H(X,Y)
=
\displaystyle=
ŌłÆ
Ōłæ
i
=
1
N
d
Ōłæ
j
=
1
N
d
p
ŌĆŗ
(
X
i
,
Y
j
)
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
p
ŌĆŗ
(
X
i
,
X
j
)
\displaystyle-\sum\limits_{i=1}^{N_{d}}\sum\limits_{j=1}^{N_{d}}\,p(X_{i},Y_{j})\,\log\,p(X_{i},X_{j})
(8)
The Mutual Information between the bar and spiral parameters (
X
X
and
Y
Y
) is defined as
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
\displaystyle I(X;Y)
=
\displaystyle=
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
)
+
H
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
)
ŌłÆ
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
,
Y
)
,
\displaystyle H(X)+H(Y)-H(X,Y),
(9)
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
=
0
I(X;Y)=0
if X and Y are statistically independent and
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
=
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
)
I(X;Y)=H(X)
if X is completely determined by Y. Normalised Mutual Information is given by
N
ŌĆŗ
M
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
\displaystyle NMI(X;Y)
=
2
ŌłŚ
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
H
ŌĆŗ
(
X
)
+
H
ŌĆŗ
(
Y
)
,
\displaystyle=\frac{2*I(X;Y)}{H(X)+H(Y)},
(10)
Normalized Mutual Information has a value ranging between
[
0
,
1
]
[0,1]
. We note,
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
I(X;Y)
and
N
ŌĆŗ
M
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌĆŗ
(
X
;
Y
)
NMI(X;Y)
is
symmetric under the exchange of
I
I
and
J
J
and therefore does not contain any
directional sense. MI measures the amount of shared information between two mutually associated variables. Hence, it can also be used to examine the mutual exclusiveness of two quantities (
Cover and Thomas
2006
). Mutual Information (MI) is a model-free measure that quantifies the statistical dependence between variables, unlike traditional correlation measurements that focus on linear relationships. For instance, PearsonŌĆÖs correlation coefficient approaches zero when the relationship between two variables is nonlinear. While traditional nonlinear regression methods can model these relationships, they often require a predetermined functional form and can be challenging to analyze when the underlying connections are unknown or highly complex. In contrast, MI measures how much knowing one variable reduces the uncertainty about another. Consequently, it captures a wide range of statistical dependencies, including linear, nonlinear, and complex relations that are difficult to parameterize.
A high value of MI indicates that two random variables are dependent, and a zero value of MI suggests that the two random variables are independent.
IV.2
Transfer Entropy
The Shannon entropy and its generalization, the MI, are
properties of the static probability distributions, while the dynamics of the
processes are contained in the transition probabilities. We measure the Transfer Entropy (TE) to study the dynamics of shared information between parameters. TE measures determine the direction and quantify the information transfer between two processes (
Schreiber
2000
). Consider the time series data of a bar parameter I (
I
Ōłł
{
i
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
I\in\{i_{n}:n=1,....N\}
) and a spiral parameter J (
J
Ōłł
{
j
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
J\in\{j_{n}:n=1,....N\}
). The TE is given by
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
Ōłæ
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
+
1
,
i
n
(
k
)
,
j
n
(
l
)
)
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
+
1
|
i
n
(
k
)
,
j
n
(
l
)
)
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
+
1
|
i
n
(
k
)
)
\displaystyle T_{J\to I}=\sum\,p(i_{n+1},i^{(k)}_{n},j^{(l)}_{n})\,\log\,{\frac{p(i_{n+1}|i^{(k)}_{n},j^{(l)}_{n})}{p(i_{n+1}|i^{(k)}_{n})}}
(11)
where
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
+
1
|
i
n
(
k
)
)
=
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
+
1
(
k
+
1
)
)
/
p
ŌĆŗ
(
i
n
(
k
)
)
p(i_{n+1}|i^{(k)}_{n})=p(i^{(k+1)}_{n+1})/p(i^{(k)}_{n})
is the conditional probability.
k
k
denotes the number of past timesteps of the bar parameter
I
I
included in predicting its future value,
i
n
(
k
)
=
(
i
n
,
i
n
ŌłÆ
1
,
ŌĆ”
,
i
n
ŌłÆ
k
+
1
)
,
i_{n}^{(k)}=(i_{n},i_{n-1},\dots,i_{n-k+1}),
(12)
while
l
l
denotes the number of past timesteps of the spiral parameter
J
J
included additionally in the prediction.
j
n
(
l
)
=
(
j
n
,
j
n
ŌłÆ
1
,
ŌĆ”
,
j
n
ŌłÆ
l
+
1
)
.
j_{n}^{(l)}=(j_{n},j_{n-1},\dots,j_{n-l+1}).
(13)
In the present work, we adopt the first-order choice.
k
=
l
=
1
,
k=l=1,
(14)
which corresponds to using only the immediately preceding values
(
i
n
,
j
n
)
(i_{n},j_{n})
to estimate the next value
i
n
+
1
i_{n+1}
.
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
T_{J\to I}
is now explicitly non-symmetric since it measures the degree of dependence of
I
I
on
J
J
and not vice versa. Followed by
Gour├®vitch and Eggermont
2007
,
Marschinski and Kantz
2002
Normalised Transfer Entropy is given by
NTE
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
TE
J
ŌåÆ
I
ŌłÆ
Ō¤©
TE
J
shuffle
ŌåÆ
I
Ō¤®
H
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
+
1
ŌłŻ
I
n
)
,
\mathrm{NTE}_{J\rightarrow I}=\frac{\mathrm{TE}_{J\rightarrow I}-\left\langle\mathrm{TE}_{J_{\mathrm{shuffle}}\rightarrow I}\right\rangle}{H(I_{n+1}\mid I_{n})},
(15)
where
Ō¤©
TE
J
shuffle
ŌåÆ
I
Ō¤®
\left\langle\mathrm{TE}_{J_{\mathrm{shuffle}}\rightarrow I}\right\rangle
represents the average shuffled transfer entropy from
J
J
to
I
I
, computed by randomly permuting the time series of
J
J
, recalculating
TE
J
shuffle
ŌåÆ
I
\mathrm{TE}_{J_{\mathrm{shuffle}}\rightarrow I}
for each realization, repeating the procedure 100 times, and taking the mean of the resulting transfer entropy values. ,
and
H
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
+
1
ŌłŻ
I
n
)
H(I_{n+1}\mid I_{n})
is the conditional entropy of
I
I
at time
n
+
1
n+1
given its value at time
n
n
, given by.
H
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
+
1
ŌłŻ
I
n
)
=
ŌłÆ
Ōłæ
I
n
+
1
,
I
n
p
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
+
1
,
I
n
)
ŌĆŗ
log
ŌüĪ
(
p
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
+
1
,
I
n
)
p
ŌĆŗ
(
I
n
)
)
.
H(I_{n+1}\mid I_{n})=-\sum_{I_{n+1},\,I_{n}}p(I_{n+1},I_{n})\log\left(\frac{p(I_{n+1},I_{n})}{p(I_{n})}\right).
(16)
Now
N
ŌĆŗ
T
ŌĆŗ
E
J
ŌåÆ
I
NTE_{J\to I}
is in the range [0,1] (
Gour├®vitch and Eggermont
,
2007
).
N
ŌĆŗ
T
ŌĆŗ
E
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
0
NTE_{J\to I}=0
when J transfers no information to I, and is 1 when J transfers maximal information to I.
We consider
101
101
barred spiral galaxies at a redshift of
z
=
0
z=0
mentioned in section
┬¦
\S
III
. We track each galaxy and identify its progenitors within the redshift range
2
<
z
<
0
2<z<0
, and obtain time-series data for the bar and spiral-arm parameters. For the time series data of a bar parameter I (
I
Ōłł
{
i
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
I\in\{i_{n}:n=1,....N\}
) and a spiral parameter J (
J
Ōłł
{
j
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
J\in\{j_{n}:n=1,....N\}
), the transfer entropy implemented using the Python implementation by Sebastiano Bontorin (
transfer_entropy
) (
Bontorin
2017
), which estimates the transfer entropy introduced by
Schreiber
(
2000
). The probability distributions required for the Transfer Entropy calculation are estimated using histogram discretization of the time series I and J. The number of bins for each variable was determined using the FreedmanŌĆōDiaconis rule (
Freedman and Diaconis
1981
), which defines the optimal histogram bin width as
h
=
2
ŌĆŗ
IQR
n
1
/
3
,
h=\frac{2\,\mathrm{IQR}}{n^{1/3}},
(17)
where
IQR
\mathrm{IQR}
is the interquartile range of the data and
n
n
is the number of samples in the time series.
For J the number of bins is then obtained as
N
bins
=
max
ŌüĪ
(
J
)
ŌłÆ
min
ŌüĪ
(
J
)
h
.
N_{\mathrm{bins}}=\frac{\max(J)-\min(J)}{h}.
(18)
This adaptive binning method accounts for both the spread of the data and the sample size and is commonly used to estimate probability densities from empirical data. We adopt this rule as an objective, widely used, data-driven method for histogram construction, thereby avoiding arbitrary bin selection.
The same procedure is applied independently to both time series
I
I
and
J
J
to construct the joint and marginal probability distributions required for the entropy calculations. Followed by TE estimation, we calculated Normalized transfer entropy using equation
15
. We note that the estimated Transfer Entropy values are sensitive to the number of bins.
While classical implementations of transfer entropy (TE) often assume stationarity for practical estimation of probability distributions, the definition of TE itself does not require stationarity. Transfer entropy is fundamentally a conditional mutual information measure, and is therefore valid for arbitrary stochastic processes, including non-stationary ones. We employ a time-resolved (or windowed) estimation approach, in which TE is computed within short temporal windows. Within each window, we make sure that each window has at least 40 data points and in windows, changes in the mean and variance remained below 5
%
\%
and
10
%
10\%
, respectively and obtain the NTE values equation
15
for both bar-to-spiral and spiral-to-bar for all bar/spiral arm parameter pairs. The final TE values are obtained by taking the average of the TE computed over all temporal windows.
IV.3
Information Flow
The concept of the Liang information flow rate (IFR) is based on information entropy and the theory of dynamical systems (
Liang
2008
,
Liang
2013
,
Liang
2014
,
Liang
2015
). Like TE, IFR also determines the direction and quantifies the information transfer between two processes. Consider the time series data of bar parameter I (
I
Ōłł
{
i
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
I\in\{i_{n}:n=1,....N\}
) and spiral parameter J (
J
Ōłł
{
j
n
:
n
=
1
,
ŌĆ”
.
N
}
J\in\{j_{n}:n=1,....N\}
). The sample covariance between
I
I
and
J
J
is defined as
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
=
(
I
ŌłÆ
I
┬»
)
ŌĆŗ
(
J
ŌłÆ
J
┬»
)
┬»
\displaystyle C_{IJ}=\overline{(I-\overline{I})(J-\overline{J})}
(19)
and covariance between
J
J
and
I
╦Ö
\dot{I}
is defined as,
C
J
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
=
(
J
ŌłÆ
J
┬»
)
ŌĆŗ
(
I
╦Ö
ŌłÆ
I
╦Ö
┬»
)
┬»
\displaystyle C_{J,dI}=\overline{(J-\overline{J})(\dot{I}-\overline{\dot{I}})}
(20)
Here the overbar denotes the sample mean,
I
╦Ö
\dot{I}
is the difference approximation of
d
ŌĆŗ
I
/
d
ŌĆŗ
t
dI/dt
using the Euler forward scheme
I
╦Ö
ŌĆŗ
(
n
)
=
I
ŌĆŗ
(
n
+
k
)
ŌłÆ
I
ŌĆŗ
(
n
)
k
ŌĆŗ
╬ö
ŌĆŗ
t
.
\displaystyle\dot{I}(n)=\frac{I(n+k)-I(n)}{k\Delta t}.
(21)
Here,
k
k
is set to 1. The time series is sampled at regular intervals
We use the Liang-Kleeman coefficient (
Liang and Kleeman
2005
,
Liang
2014
) to quantify the directional transfer of information across time series. Following Equation (10) of
Liang
(
2014
), the IFR is given by
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌĆŗ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
J
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
2
ŌĆŗ
C
I
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
2
ŌĆŗ
C
J
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌĆŗ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
2
,
\displaystyle T_{J\to I}=\frac{C_{II}C_{IJ}C_{J,dI}-C_{IJ}^{2}C_{I,dI}}{C_{II}^{2}C_{JJ}-C_{II}C_{IJ}^{2}},
(22)
This formula uses only sample covariances, which makes it easy to compute. If
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
=
0
C_{IJ}=0
, then
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
0
T_{J\to I}=0
However, if
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
0
T_{J\to I}=0
, it doesnŌĆÖt mean that
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
C_{IJ}
has to be zero. Causation leads to correlation, but correlation does not necessarily mean there is causation.
The overall rate of entropy change in the receiver(I) is influenced not just by the information transfer from the transmitter(J), characterized by the rate
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
T_{J\rightarrow I}
, but also by the intrinsic entropy rate (
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
ŌłŚ
d
ŌĆŗ
t
\frac{dH_{I}^{*}}{dt}
) and the noise-induced entropy rate
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
s
d
ŌĆŗ
t
\frac{dH_{I}^{s}}{dt}
(
Liang
2015
).
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
ŌłŚ
d
ŌĆŗ
t
\displaystyle\frac{dH_{I}^{*}}{dt}
=
p
J
ŌĆŗ
I
\displaystyle=p_{JI}
(23a)
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
s
d
ŌĆŗ
t
\displaystyle\frac{dH_{I}^{s}}{dt}
=
╬ö
ŌĆŗ
t
2
ŌĆŗ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
(
C
d
ŌĆŗ
I
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
+
p
J
ŌĆŗ
I
2
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
+
q
J
ŌĆŗ
I
2
C
J
ŌĆŗ
J
\displaystyle=\frac{\Delta t}{2C_{II}}\Big(C_{dI,dI}+p_{JI}^{2}C_{II}+q_{JI}^{2}C_{JJ}
ŌłÆ
2
p
J
ŌĆŗ
I
C
d
ŌĆŗ
I
,
I
ŌłÆ
2
q
J
ŌĆŗ
I
C
d
ŌĆŗ
I
,
J
+
2
p
J
ŌĆŗ
I
q
J
ŌĆŗ
I
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
)
\displaystyle\quad-2p_{JI}C_{dI,I}-2q_{JI}C_{dI,J}+2p_{JI}q_{JI}C_{IJ}\Big)
(23b)
Where
p
J
ŌĆŗ
I
\displaystyle p_{JI}
=
C
J
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
I
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
J
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
C
J
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
2
\displaystyle=\frac{{C}_{JJ}C_{I,dI}-C_{IJ}{C}_{J,dI}}{C_{JJ}C_{II}-C_{IJ}^{2}}
(24a)
q
J
ŌĆŗ
I
\displaystyle q_{JI}
=
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
I
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
+
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌĆŗ
C
J
,
d
ŌĆŗ
I
C
J
ŌĆŗ
J
ŌĆŗ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
I
ŌłÆ
C
I
ŌĆŗ
J
2
,
\displaystyle=\frac{-{C}_{IJ}C_{I,dI}+{C}_{II}C_{J,dI}}{C_{JJ}C_{II}-C_{IJ}^{2}},
(24b)
Following
Liang
2015
, the normalisation factor is given by
Z
ŌēĪ
|
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
|
+
|
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
ŌłŚ
d
ŌĆŗ
t
|
+
|
d
ŌĆŗ
H
I
n
ŌĆŗ
o
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
e
d
ŌĆŗ
t
|
.
\displaystyle Z\equiv|{T_{J\to I}}|+|{\frac{dH_{I}^{*}}{dt}}|+|{\frac{dH_{I}^{noise}}{dt}}|.
(25)
Thus, the normalized IFR is
Žä
J
ŌåÆ
I
=
T
J
ŌåÆ
I
/
Z
.
\displaystyle\tau_{J\to I}=T_{J\to I}/Z.
(26)
Žä
J
ŌåÆ
I
\tau_{J\rightarrow I}
measures the percentage of the total entropy rate of change for
I
I
which is due to its interaction with
J
J
(
Liang
2015
). The normalized IFR values lie within the range 0 to 1.
We consider
101
101
barred spiral galaxies at a redshift of
z
=
0
z=0
mentioned in section
┬¦
\S
III
. We track each galaxy and identify its progenitors within the redshift range
2
<
z
<
0
2<z<0
, and obtain time-series data for the bar (I) and spiral-arm parameters (J). We then calculate the normalized IFR values using the publicly available Python package
Pyleoclim
(
pyleoclim.utils.causality.liang_causality
;
Khider
et al.
2022
) for both bar-to-spiral and spiral-to-bar for all bar/spiral arm parameter pairs, for both samples of galaxies mentioned in section
┬¦
\S
III
.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6:
Evolution of (a) bar length
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
, (b) bar strength
A
2
,
bar
A_{2,\mathrm{bar}}
, and (c) pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
with time for the barred spiral galaxy (ID: 394621) at redshift
z
=
0
z=0
.
Figure 7:
Radar plot: Comparison of Mutual Information between different pairs of structural and kinematic parameters of the bar and its associated spiral arm at different redshifts. Spikes in this radar plot correspond to Mutual Information (MI) values for different parameter pairs. The grey scale indicates the values of the Mutual Information.
Figure 8:
Mutual Information between bar and spiral arm parameters for the total sample [green] and for two groups of galaxy samples: Bar precedes spiral [red], spiral precedes bar [blue]. Top Panel: Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral arm strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral arm strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, and Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral arm strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
]. Bottom Panel: Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, and Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
. In each panel, we show the average Mutual Information values by horizontal lines for the respective samples.
V
Results & discussion
V.1
Mutual Information
We calculate the value of MI to quantify the strength of the association between a pair of structural/kinematic parameters: one corresponding to the bar, and the other to the spiral arm. We consider a sample of 101 barredŌĆōspiral galaxies identified at redshift
z
=
0
z=0
, as described in Section
III
. We track each galaxy and identify its progenitors within the redshift range
0.55
<
z
<
0
0.55<z<0
. For this sample, we compute the mutual information (MI) between bar and spiral arm parameter pairs at each redshift. The MI values for all parameter pairs are normalized to the range
[
0
,
1
]
[0,1]
using Equation┬Ā(
10
). All parameter pairs exhibit MI values ranging from
0.4
0.4
to
0.8
0.8
, indicating a significant degree of association between the bar and spiral arms (
Cover and Thomas
2006
), thus confirming their co-evolution. In Figure
7
, we present the MI values of different pairs of parameters in a Radar Plot. The spikes in this plot correspond to their MI values, with MI at different redshifts given in different colours. We observe that the MI values do not show significant variation with respect to redshift for any of the above parameter pairs.
We next compare the MI values for both groups of galaxies: one in which the bar precedes the spiral, and the other in which the spiral precedes the bar. In Figure
8
, we show the time evolution of MI between bar and spiral arm parameters with redshift for the total sample [green] as well as for the two groups of galaxy samples: Bar precedes spiral [red], spiral precedes bar [blue]. The top (bottom) panel shows the MI between spiral arm strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
(spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
) and bar parameters, i.e., bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
, bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
, bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
) and spiral arm strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, respectively. In each panel, we indicate the average MI value between each pair of parameters for each case with a horizontal line. For the total galaxy sample, the parameter pairs,
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
-
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
,
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌłÆ
╬©
A_{2bar}-\Psi
,
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌłÆ
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
r_{bar}-A_{2spiral}
,
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌłÆ
╬©
r_{bar}-\Psi
,
╬®
ŌłÆ
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
\Omega-A_{2spiral}
exhibits an average MI value of 0.6 and the parameter pair
╬®
ŌłÆ
╬©
\Omega-\Psi
shows an average MI value of 0.5.
We note, for both the galaxy samples (bar precedes spiral and spiral precedes bar), the mean MI is between a common range of
0.4
ŌłÆ
0.5
0.4-0.5
, revealing a strong enough and comparable degree of co-evolution of the bar and the spiral arm
.
Our results align with previous studies that establish the co-evolution of bars and spiral arms in galaxies. Numerical modelling by
Schwarz
(
1984
) shows a positive correlation between the pitch angle of spiral arms and the strength of bars. Observational evidence from real galaxies further supports this association. Using Ks-band observations from the William Herschel Telescope for a sample of 15 nearby spiral galaxies,
Block
et al.
(
2004
) and
Buta
et al.
(
2009
) found that stronger bars are consistently linked to more prominent spiral arms. When bars and spirals emerge from the same instability, bars exert an influence on the spirals. Additionally, an analysis of barred-spiral galaxies from the Spitzer Survey by
D├Łaz-Garc├Ła, S.
et al.
(
2019
) reveals a moderate correlation between bar strength and spiral amplitude. Moreover,
Elmegreen
et al.
(
2011
) demonstrates that longer bars with greater m=2 modes are often associated with stronger spiral structures. Also discuss the possibility that grand-design spiral arms in galaxies are formed from spiral density waves driven by bars. Since our study applies primarily to barred-spiral galaxies that simultaneously exhibit a well-defined bar and a two-armed spiral pattern in the stellar disc, and selection excludes flocculent, multi-armed, and unbarred galaxies, the extrapolation to the broader population of observed disk galaxies should be made with caution.
However, it is important to note that MI is a static measure; it does not capture dynamic evolution or indicate a causal relationship between two random variables.
V.2
Transfer Entropy & Information Flow
Figure 9:
Violin plots of Transfer Entropy values for different parameter pairs. The two sides of the violin illustrate the distribution of Transfer Entropy in two opposite directions: Transfer Entropy from spiral to bar (
T
spiral to bar
T_{\text{spiral\ to\ bar}}
) (darker shade) and Transfer Entropy from bar to spiral (
T
bar to spiral
T_{\text{bar\ to\ spiral}}
) (lighter shade). Red shades represent galaxies where spiral precedes bar, while blue shades indicate galaxies where bar precedes spiral. Black horizontal lines inside the violins denote the median value of Transfer Entropy for each direction. Left to right panels correspond to the different parameter pairs as follows: Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, and Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
.
Figure 10:
Violin plots of Liang information flow rates for different parameter pairs. The two sides of the violin illustrates the distribution of Liang information flow rate in two opposite directions: Liang information flow rate from spiral to bar (
I
spiral to bar
I_{\text{spiral\ to\ bar}}
) (darker shade) and Liang information flow rate from bar to spiral (
I
bar to spiral
I_{\text{bar\ to\ spiral}}
) (lighter shade). Red shades represent galaxies where spiral precedes bar, while blue shades indicate galaxies where bar precedes spiral. Black horizontal lines inside the violins denote the median value of the Liang information flow rate. Left to right panels correspond to the different parameter pairs as follows: Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, and Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
and Bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, Bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
, and Bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
and spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
. Vertical black lines separate the violins for different groups of parameter pairs.
Table 2:
Median values of the Transfer Entropy corresponding to the different pairs of structural and kinematic pairs of bars and their associated spiral arms in our galaxy samples. The errors denote
the differences between the median and the first and third
quantiles.
Parameter pair
S
1
1
1
Spiral precedes bar
B
2
2
2
Bar precedes spiral
S
+
+
B
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
3
3
3
bar strengthŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.11
+
0.11
0.38^{+0.11}_{-0.11}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.05
0.38^{+0.05}_{-0.06}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.08
0.38^{+0.08}_{-0.06}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.10
+
0.12
0.36^{+0.12}_{-0.10}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.05
0.37^{+0.05}_{-0.04}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.06
0.37^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
4
4
4
bar strengthŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.35
ŌłÆ
0.09
+
0.09
0.35^{+0.09}_{-0.09}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.09
+
0.07
0.38^{+0.07}_{-0.09}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.09
0.36^{+0.09}_{-0.08}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.36^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.05
0.37^{+0.05}_{-0.07}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.37^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
5
5
5
bar lengthŌĆōspiral amplitude in both directions
0.42
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.42^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
0.42
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.06
0.42^{+0.06}_{-0.08}
0.42
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.06
0.42^{+0.06}_{-0.08}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.08
0.36^{+0.08}_{-0.08}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.06
0.38^{+0.06}_{-0.08}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.09
+
0.08
0.37^{+0.08}_{-0.09}
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
6
6
6
bar lengthŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.42
ŌłÆ
0.10
+
0.05
0.42^{+0.05}_{-0.10}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.08
+
0.10
0.38^{+0.10}_{-0.08}
0.39
ŌłÆ
0.09
+
0.08
0.39^{+0.08}_{-0.09}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.07
0.38^{+0.07}_{-0.06}
0.35
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.08
0.35^{+0.08}_{-0.05}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.07
0.36^{+0.07}_{-0.06}
╬®
\Omega
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
7
7
7
bar pattern speedŌĆōspiral amplitude in both directions
0.39
ŌłÆ
0.10
+
0.09
0.39^{+0.09}_{-0.10}
0.39
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.06
0.39^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
0.39
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.39^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
0.42
ŌłÆ
0.09
+
0.07
0.42^{+0.07}_{-0.09}
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.04
0.38^{+0.04}_{-0.07}
0.39
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.39^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
╬®
\Omega
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
8
8
8
bar pattern speedŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.38
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.06
0.38^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
0.35
ŌłÆ
0.07
+
0.06
0.35^{+0.06}_{-0.07}
0.36
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.06
0.36^{+0.06}_{-0.06}
0.37
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.04
0.37^{+0.04}_{-0.04}
0.33
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.09
0.33^{+0.09}_{-0.06}
0.35
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.06
0.35^{+0.06}_{-0.05}
Table 3:
Median values of the Liang information flow rate corresponding to the
different pairs of structural and kinematic parameters of bars and their
associated spiral arms in our galaxy samples. The errors denote
the differences between the median and the first and third quantiles.
Parameter pair
S
9
9
9
Spiral precedes bar
B
10
10
10
Bar precedes spiral
S
+
+
B
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
11
11
11
bar strengthŌĆōspiral amplitude in both directions
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.11
0.09^{+0.11}_{-0.04}
0.11
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.04
0.11^{+0.04}_{-0.06}
0.10
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.07
0.10^{+0.07}_{-0.06}
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.12
0.09^{+0.12}_{-0.04}
0.11
ŌłÆ
0.06
+
0.04
0.11^{+0.04}_{-0.06}
0.10
ŌłÆ
0.05
+
0.08
0.10^{+0.08}_{-0.05}
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
12
12
12
bar strengthŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.02
0.05^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
0.06
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.04
0.06^{+0.04}_{-0.02}
0.06
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.03
0.06^{+0.03}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.02
0.05^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
0.06
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.04
0.06^{+0.04}_{-0.02}
0.06
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.03
0.06^{+0.03}_{-0.02}
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
13
13
13
bar lengthŌĆōspiral amplitude in both directions
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.07
0.09^{+0.07}_{-0.04}
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.06
0.09^{+0.06}_{-0.04}
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.07
0.09^{+0.07}_{-0.04}
0.08
ŌłÆ
0.03
+
0.07
0.08^{+0.07}_{-0.03}
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.05
0.09^{+0.05}_{-0.04}
0.09
ŌłÆ
0.04
+
0.06
0.09^{+0.06}_{-0.04}
r
bar
r_{\mathrm{bar}}
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
14
14
14
bar lengthŌĆōspiral aarm pitch angle in both directions
0.04
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.04^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.06
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.02
0.06^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.02
0.05^{+0.02}_{-0.01}
0.04
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.04^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.03
0.05^{+0.03}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.02
0.05^{+0.02}_{-0.01}
╬®
\Omega
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2\mathrm{spiral}}
15
15
15
bar pattern speedŌĆōspiral amplitude in both directions
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.04
0.05^{+0.04}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.02
0.05^{+0.02}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.04
0.05^{+0.04}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.03
0.05^{+0.03}_{-0.02}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.03
0.05^{+0.03}_{-0.01}
0.05
ŌłÆ
0.02
+
0.03
0.05^{+0.03}_{-0.02}
╬®
\Omega
ŌåÆ
\rightarrow
ŌåÉ
\leftarrow
╬©
\Psi
16
16
16
bar pattern speedŌĆōspiral arm pitch angle in both directions
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.01
+
0.01
0.03^{+0.01}_{-0.01}
Using the concept of Transfer Entropy (TE), we next investigate whether any one of the components, namely the bar or the spiral arm, is effectively responsible for driving their co-evolution. To our best possible knowledge, it is the first such attempt in the study of barred-spiral galaxies. We consider
101
101
barred
spiral galaxies at a redshift of
z
=
0
z=0
mentioned in section
┬¦
\S
III
.
In Figure
9
, we show the Violin Plots of TE values for different parameter pairs. The two sides of the violin present the distribution of TE in two different directions: TE from spiral-to-bar (
T
ŌĆŗ
E
spiral- to- bar
TE_{\text{spiral-\ to-\ bar}}
) (darker shade) and TE from bar-to-spiral (
T
ŌĆŗ
E
bar- to- spiral
TE_{\text{bar-\ to-\ spiral}}
) (lighter shade). Red shades represent galaxies where spiral precedes bar, while blue shades indicate galaxies where bar precedes spiral. We calculate the median of the distribution (black lines) to determine the average degree of information transfer from bar (spiral) to spiral (bar), in each case. Each panel represent the TE distributions for a different parameter pair. Table (
2
) shows the median values of TE for all pairs of parameters for both galaxy samples and the combined sample.
We note, for both the galaxy samples, the median TE value from bar-to-spiral or from spiral-to-bar lies between a common range of
0.33
ŌłÆ
0.42
0.33-0.42
, (i) again revealing a strong enough degree of co-evolution between the bar and the spiral arm (ii) equally regulated by both the components
. Further, we also determine the distribution of TE values (from bar-to-spiral as well as spiral-to-bar) by combining the two samples. We found that the median TE values for all parameter pairs are about
0.35
ŌłÆ
0.42
0.35-0.42
in each case, again confirming a fair degree of co-evolution between the bar and the spiral arm, and indicating that both components are equally responsible for driving it.
Similarly, in Figure
10
, we show Violin plots of IFRs for different parameter pairs. We calculate the median of the distribution (black lines) to determine the average degree of information transfer from bar (spiral) to spiral (bar), in each case. Table (
3
) shows the median value of Information Flow for all pairs of parameters for both groups of galaxies. We note that for each parameter pair, the median Information Flow values range between
0.03
ŌłÆ
0.11
0.03-0.11
for each of the galaxy samples, as well as for the combined samples, confirming the same trend as the TE values
(Liang,
2015
)
.
Finally, we try to assess any subtle yet significant differences in the evolutionary pathways of the two groups of galaxies: those in which bars precede spirals and those in which spirals precede bars. Towards that end, we employ the 2-sample KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov (KS) test to distinguish the distributions of the TE and the IFR between all pairs of bar and spiral arm parameters. The null hypothesis is that the two samples are drawn from the same distribution. A p-value less than
0.05
0.05
indicates a significant difference between the groups. For TE between all the parameter pairs, only the TE from spiral arm pitch angle to bar pattern speed shows a significant difference between the two groups (
p
p
value=
0.02
0.02
). For the remaining parameter pairs, the
p
p
-value is greater than
0.05
0.05
, indicating the result is inconclusive. Similarly, the IFR from bar length to spiral arm pitch angle shows a significant difference between the two groups (
p
p
-value = 0.03). In Figure
11
(a), we show the cumulative distribution of (i) TE from spiral arm pitch angle to bar pattern speed for two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue) (ii) IFR from bar length to spiral arm pitch angle for two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue). Interestingly, in the former case, the distribution of the first sample is dominated by low values, and that of the second by high values of TE. In case of the latter, exactly the reverse is noted. This implies that the bar pattern speed is regulated by the spiral pitch angle more strongly when the spiral forms before the bar. Similarly, the bar length regulates the spiral pitch-angle more effectively when the bar forms before the spiral. This complies with the study of
Sellwood and Sparke
(
1988
) who suggested that within a radius of 1.6 times the length of the bar, spirals act as a continuation of the m=
2
2
bar mode but begin to decouple beyond this range. Further, using numerical simulations,
Garma-Oehmichen
et al.
(
2021
) showed that when a bar perturber induces the spirals, the pitch angle best correlates with the bar pattern speed. However, the causal relation between the two parameters remained unexplored.
.
V.3
Angular Momentum Exchange between the bar and the spiral arm
The quadrupole moment associated with the gravitational potential of the non-axisymmetric features like the bar and the spiral arms results in torques
. It thereby helps in angular momentum transport (
Lynden-Bell and Kalnajs
1972
,
Lynden-Bell and Kalnajs
1972
). The bar transfers angular momentum to the halo and eventually slows down, which, in turn, strengthens the bar (
Weinberg
1985
,
Lynden-Bell and Kalnajs
1972
,
Athanassoula
2005
). The spiral arms transfer angular momentum from one part of the disk to another (
Binney and Tremaine
1987
).
To investigate if angular momentum exchange is the primary physical mechanism responsible for the association between the bar and the spiral arm parameters, we first obtain the time series evolution of the angular momentum in the bar and spiral arm region for each one of the 101 samples mentioned in
┬¦
\S
III
. We measure TE and IFR between the respective specific angular momentum time series associated with the bar and spiral components. We note a median value of
0.6
0.6
in each direction/case for TE across both galaxy samples. Further, the median IFR values range between 0.2 and 0.3 for both. In fact,
D├Łaz-Garc├Ła, S.
et al.
(
2019
) finds a weak correlation between gravitational torques at the bar end and pitch angle.
Finally, we also employ the KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov (KS) test to compare the TE of angular momenta in the two galaxy samples. Only the TE from spiral arm angular momentum to bar angular momentum shows a significant difference between the two groups (p value =
0.005
0.005
), possibly implying the angular momentum exchange in these two groups of galaxies is different. In Figure
12
, we show the cumulative distribution of TE from the angular momentum of the bar to the angular momentum of the spiral arm for two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue).
(a)
(b)
Figure 11:
Cumulative distribution of (a) Transfer Entropy from spiral arm pitch angle to bar pattern speed and (b) Liang information flow rate from bar length to spiral arm pitch angle for two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue). Solid and dashed lines mark the median and third quartile of each distribution, respectively, and the KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov test p-value is indicated within the figure.
Figure 12:
Cumulative distribution of Transfer Entropy from spiral arm specific angular momentum to bar specific angular momentum for two galaxy samples: bar precedes spiral (orange) and spiral precedes bar (blue). Solid and dashed lines mark the median and third quartile of each distribution, respectively, and the KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov test p-value is indicated within the figure.
VI
Conclusions
We investigate the co-evolution of the bar and spiral arms in barred-spiral galaxies using the TNG50 cosmological magneto-hydrodynamical simulation. This analysis focuses on 101 barred-spiral galaxies at a redshift of z = 0, classified into two groups based on whether the bar or the spiral arm appears first in the stellar disk. We note that in the first group, spirals form almost immediately after bars. However, in the second group, bars form about 1.7 Gyrs after the spirals.
Initially, we calculate the MI between a structural or kinematic parameter of the bar (bar strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
A_{2bar}
, bar length
r
b
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
r
r_{bar}
, bar pattern speed
╬®
\Omega
) and a spiral arm parameter (spiral strength
A
2
ŌĆŗ
s
ŌĆŗ
p
ŌĆŗ
i
ŌĆŗ
r
ŌĆŗ
a
ŌĆŗ
l
A_{2spiral}
, spiral arm pitch angle
╬©
\Psi
) for the above sample at different
z
z
values between
0
<
z
<
0.5
0<z<0.5
. Our calculated values of MI for each galaxy sample (0.4-0.6) and the combined sample (0.4-0.8) indicate a significant degree of association between the parameters of the bar and those of the spiral arms. In order to identify if only one of the components is effectively responsible for driving their co-evolution, we next calculate the Transfer Entropy (TE) values (bar-to-spiral TE and spiral-to-bar TE) and the Liang information flow rate (IFR) from the time series data of each of the above bar-spiral parameter pairs. We find that the median bar-to-spiral TE values (0.33 - 0.42) are equal to those of the spiral-to-bar TE values as well as those of the combined sample (0.35-0.42). A similar trend was observed in our calculated IFRs, possibly indicating that the bar and the spiral arm regulate their co-evolution on an equal footing.
Further, we employ the KolmogorovŌĆōSmirnov (KS)
to check for subtle yet significant differences between the TE distributions of the two galaxy samples. For the TE between all the parameter pairs, only the TE from bar pattern speed to spiral arm pitch angle shows a significant difference between the two groups (p value =
0.02
0.02
). Similarly, the IFR from spiral arm pitch angle to bar length shows a significant difference between the two groups (p-value =
0.03
0.03
). Interestingly, in the former case, the distribution of the first sample is dominated by low values, and that of the second by high values of TE. In case of the latter, exactly the reverse is noted. This implies that the bar pattern speed is regulated by the spiral pitch angle more strongly when the spiral forms before the bar. Similarly, the bar length regulates the spiral pitch-angle more effectively when the bar forms before the spiral.
Finally, to assess the primary mechanism driving the flow of information, we measure TE and IFR between the angular momenta of the bar and the spiral arm of our sample galaxies. We note a median TE value of
Ōł╝
\sim
0.6 for both galaxy samples. The median IFR value also ranges between 0.2 - 0.3 for both the galaxy samples, possibly indicating that the flow of information between bar and spiral arm parameters is driven by angular momentum exchange.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Suman Sarkar for sharing details about the Mutual Information study. They also thank Prof. Arif Babul, University of Victoria and the anonymous referee for their valuable comments and suggestions.
References
K. Aditya and A. Banerjee (2025)
Evolution of low surface brightness ultrathin galaxies: the role of dark matter halo and bar formation on disk thickness
.
The Astrophysical Journal
992
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā179
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
J. A. L. Aguerri (1999)
A strong correlation between bar strength and global star forming activity in isolated barred galaxies
.
A&A
351
,
pp.┬Ā43ŌĆō46
.
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
S. Ansar and M. Das (2023)
The stellar bar - dark matter halo connection in the TNG50 simulations
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp.┬ĀarXiv:2311.11998
.
External Links:
Document
,
2311.11998
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
E. Athanassoula and A. Misiriotis (2002)
Morphology, photometry and kinematics of n-body bars ŌĆö i. three models with different halo central concentrations
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
330
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā35ŌĆō52
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/330/1/35/18414030/330-1-35.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦II
.
E. Athanassoula, M. Romero-G├│mez, A. Bosma, and J. J. Masdemont (2009)
Rings and spirals in barred galaxies ŌĆō ii. ring and spiral morphology
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
400
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā1706ŌĆō1720
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/400/4/1706/5645756/mnras0400-1706.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
E. Athanassoula (2005)
On the nature of bulges in general and of box/peanut bulges in particular: input from N-body simulations
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
358
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā1477ŌĆō1488
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/358/4/1477/18661313/358-4-1477.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦V.3
.
R. A. Benjamin, E. Churchwell, B. L. Babler, R. Indebetouw, M. R. Meade, B. A. Whitney, C. Watson, M. G. Wolfire, M. J. Wolff, R. Ignace, T. M. Bania, S. Bracker, D. P. Clemens, L. Chomiuk, M. Cohen, J. M. Dickey, J. M. Jackson, H. A. Kobulnicky, E. P. Mercer, J. S. Mathis, S. R. Stolovy, and B. Uzpen (2005)
First glimpse results on the stellar structure of the galaxy
.
The Astrophysical Journal
630
(
2
),
pp.┬ĀL149
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
J. Binney and S. Tremaine (1987)
Galactic dynamics
.
springer
.
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.3
.
D. L. Block, R. Buta, J. H. Knapen, D. M. Elmegreen, B. G. Elmegreen, and I. Puerari (2004)
Gravitational Bar and Spiral Arm Torques from K
s
-band Observations and Implications for the Pattern Speeds
.
AJ
128
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā183ŌĆō201
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0405227
Cited by:
┬¦V.1
.
S. Bontorin (2017)
transfer_entropy: transfer entropy between two time series ŌĆō implementation in python
.
Note:
https://github.com/notsebastiano/transfer_entropy
GitHub repository, accessed 2026-06-05
Cited by:
┬¦IV.2
.
W. B. Burton (1988)
The structure of our Galaxy derived from observations of neutral hydrogen.
.
In
Galactic and Extragalactic Radio Astronomy
,
K. I. Kellermann and G. L. Verschuur (Eds.)
,
pp.┬Ā295ŌĆō358
.
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
R. J. Buta, J. H. Knapen, B. G. Elmegreen, H. Salo, E. Laurikainen, D. M. Elmegreen, I. Puerari, and D. L. Block (2009)
DO bars drive spiral density waves?
.
The Astronomical Journal
137
(
5
),
pp.┬Ā4487
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.1
.
G. Contopoulos and P. Grosbol (1989)
Orbits in barred galaxies
.
A&A┬ĀRev.
1
(
3-4
),
pp.┬Ā261ŌĆō289
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦I
.
T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas (2006)
Elements of information theory (wiley series in telecommunications and signal processing)
.
Wiley-Interscience
,
USA
.
External Links:
ISBN 0471241954
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.1
,
┬¦V.1
.
T. M. Dame, D. Hartmann, and P. Thaddeus (2001)
The milky way in molecular clouds: a new complete co survey
.
The Astrophysical Journal
547
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā792
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
M. Das, E. Laurikainen, H. Salo, and R. Buta (2008)
Variation of bar strength with central velocity dispersion in┬Āspiral┬Āgalaxies
.
Astrophysics and Space Science
317
(
3ŌĆō4
),
pp.┬Ā163ŌĆō168
.
External Links:
ISSN 1572-946X
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
B. L. Davis (2013)
Logarithmic spiral arm pitch angle of late-type galaxies: measurement and relationship to galactic nuclear supermassive black hole mass
.
American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts 221 221, 206.02, 2013
.
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
W. Dehnen, M. Semczuk, and R. Sch├Čnrich (2023)
Measuring bar pattern speeds from single simulation snapshots
.
MNRAS
518
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā2712ŌĆō2718
.
External Links:
Document
,
2211.00674
Cited by:
┬¦II
.
D├Łaz-Garc├Ła, S., Salo, H., Knapen, J. H., and Herrera-Endoqui, M. (2019)
The shapes of spiral arms in the s4g survey and their connection with stellar barsŌŗå
.
AA
631
,
pp.┬ĀA94
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.1
,
┬¦V.3
.
D. M. Elmegreen, B. G. Elmegreen, A. Yau, E. Athanassoula, A. Bosma, R. J. Buta, G. Helou, L. C. Ho, D. A. Gadotti, J. H. Knapen, E. Laurikainen, B. F. Madore, K. L. Masters, S. E. Meidt, K. Men├®ndez-Delmestre, M. W. Regan, H. Salo, K. Sheth, D. Zaritsky, M. Aravena, R. Skibba, J. L. Hinz, J. Laine, A. Gil de Paz, J. Mu├▒oz-Mateos, M. Seibert, T. Mizusawa, T. Kim, and S. Erroz Ferrer (2011)
Grand Design and Flocculent Spirals in the Spitzer Survey of Stellar Structure in Galaxies (S
4
G)
.
ApJ
737
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā32
.
External Links:
Document
,
1106.4840
Cited by:
┬¦V.1
.
N. Frankel, A. Pillepich, H. Rix, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, J. Sanders, J. Bovy, J. Kollmeier, N. Murray, and T. Mackereth (2022)
Simulated Bars May Be Shorter But Are Not Slower Than Observed: TNG50 vs. MaNGA
.
arXiv e-prints
,
pp.┬ĀarXiv:2201.08406
.
External Links:
2201.08406
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
A. Fraser-McKelvie, M. Merrifield, A. Arag├│n-Salamanca, and K. Masters (2019)
Properties of barred galaxies in the manga galaxy survey
.
Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union
14
(
S353
),
pp.┬Ā226ŌĆō230
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
D. Freedman and P. Diaconis (1981)
On the histogram as a density estimator: L
2
theory
.
Zeitschrift f├╝r Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verwandte Gebiete
57
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā453ŌĆō476
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦IV.2
.
D. Friedli and L. Martinet (1993)
Bars within bars in lenticular and spiral galaxies : a step in secular evolution?
.
A&A
277
,
pp.┬Ā27ŌĆō41
.
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
M. S. Fujii, J. Baba, T. R. Saitoh, J. Makino, E. Kokubo, and K. Wada (2011)
THE dynamics of spiral arms in pure stellar disks
.
The Astrophysical Journal
730
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā109
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
M. A. Galloway, K. W. Willett, L. F. Fortson, C. N. Cardamone, K. Schawinski, E. Cheung, C. J. Lintott, K. L. Masters, T. Melvin, and B. D. Simmons (2015)
Galaxy zoo: the effect of bar-driven fuelling on the presence of an active galactic nucleus in disc galaxies
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
448
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā3442ŌĆō3454
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
I. L. Garland, M. Walmsley, M. S. Silcock, L. M. Potts, J. Smith, B. D. Simmons, C. J. Lintott, R. J. Smethurst, J. M. Dawson, W. C. Keel, S. Kruk, K. B. Mantha, K. L. Masters, D. OŌĆÖRyan, J. J. Popp, and M. R. Thorne (2024)
Galaxy zoo desi: large-scale bars as a secular mechanism for triggering agn
.
External Links:
2406.20096
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
L. Garma-Oehmichen, L. Martinez-Medina, H. Hern├Īndez-Toledo, and I. Puerari (2021)
How the bar properties affect the induced spiral structure
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
502
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā4708ŌĆō4722
.
External Links:
ISSN 1365-2966
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.2
.
George, K., Subramanian, S., and Paul, K. T. (2019)
Significance of bar quenching in the global quenching of star formation
.
AA
628
,
pp.┬ĀA24
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
B. Gour├®vitch and J. J. Eggermont (2007)
Evaluating information transfer between auditory cortical neurons
.
Journal of Neurophysiology
97
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā2533ŌĆō2543
.
Note:
PMID: 17202243
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01106.2006
Cited by:
┬¦IV.2
,
┬¦IV.2
.
R. J. J. Grand, D. Kawata, and M. Cropper (2013)
Spiral arm pitch angle and galactic shear rate inn-body simulations┬Āof disc galaxies
.
Astronomy amp; Astrophysics
553
,
pp.┬ĀA77
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-0746
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
A. Habibi, M. Roshan, M. Hosseinirad, H. Khosroshahi, J. A. L. Aguerri, V. Cuomo, and S. Abbassi (2024)
The redshift evolution of galactic bar pattern speed in tng50
.
Astronomy amp; Astrophysics
691
,
pp.┬ĀA122
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-0746
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
I. B. Hewitt and P. Treuthardt (2020)
Comparison of galaxy spiral arm pitch angle measurements using manual and automated techniques
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
493
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā3854ŌĆō3865
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/493/3/3854/32894564/staa354.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦II
.
L. M. Hogarth, A. Saintonge, T. A. Davis, S. L. Ellison, L. Lin, C. L├│pez-Cob├Ī, H. -. Pan, and M. D. Thorp (2024)
The almaquest survey xiv: do radial molecular gas flows affect the star-forming ability of barred galaxies?
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
528
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā6768ŌĆō6785
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/528/4/6768/56743020/stae377.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
D. Izquierdo-Villalba, S. Bonoli, Y. Rosas-Guevara, V. Springel, S. D. M. White, T. Zana, M. Dotti, D. Spinoso, M. Bonetti, and A. Lupi (2022)
Disc instability and bar formation: view from the IllustrisTNG simulations
.
MNRAS
514
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā1006ŌĆō1020
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.07734
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
S. K. Kataria and M. Vivek (2023)
How does the presence of bar affects the fueling of supermassive black holes? an illustristng100 perspective
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
527
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā3366ŌĆō3380
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/527/2/3366/53668230/stad3383.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
D. Khider, J. Emile-Geay, F. Zhu, A. James, J. Landers, V. Ratnakar, and Y. Gil (2022)
Pyleoclim: paleoclimate timeseries analysis and visualization with python
.
Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology
37
(
10
),
pp.┬Āe2022PA004509
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦IV.3
.
W. Kim and E. C. Ostriker (2002)
Formation and Fragmentation of Gaseous Spurs in Spiral Galaxies
.
ApJ
570
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā132ŌĆō151
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0111398
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
E. Laurikainen, H. Salo, and R. Buta (2004)
Comparison of bar strengths and fractions of bars in active and nonactive galaxies
.
The Astrophysical Journal
607
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā103ŌĆō124
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
X. S. Liang and R. Kleeman (2005)
Information transfer between dynamical system components
.
Phys. Rev. Lett.
95
,
pp.┬Ā244101
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.3
.
X. S. Liang (2008)
Information flow within stochastic dynamical systems
.
Phys. Rev. E
78
,
pp.┬Ā031113
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.3
.
X. S. Liang (2013)
Local predictability and information flow in complex dynamical systems
.
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
248
,
pp.┬Ā1ŌĆō15
.
External Links:
ISSN 0167-2789
,
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.3
.
X. S. Liang (2014)
Unraveling the cause-effect relation between time series
.
Phys. Rev. E
90
,
pp.┬Ā052150
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.3
,
┬¦IV.3
.
X. S. Liang (2015)
Normalizing the causality between time series
.
Phys. Rev. E
92
,
pp.┬Ā022126
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.3
,
┬¦IV.3
,
┬¦IV.3
,
┬¦IV.3
,
┬¦V.2
.
C. C. Lin and F. H. Shu (1964)
On the Spiral Structure of Disk Galaxies.
.
ApJ
140
,
pp.┬Ā646
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
P. D. L├│pez, C. Scannapieco, S. A. Cora, and I. D. Gargiulo (2024)
Unveiling the origins of galactic bars: insights from barred and unbarred galaxies
.
MNRAS
529
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā979ŌĆō998
.
External Links:
Document
,
2403.13061
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
D. Lynden-Bell and A. J. Kalnajs (1972)
On the generating mechanism of spiral structure
.
MNRAS
157
,
pp.┬Ā1
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.3
.
R. Marschinski and H. Kantz (2002)
Analysing the information flow between financial time series: an improved estimator for transfer entropy
.
The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems
30
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā275ŌĆō281
.
Cited by:
┬¦IV.2
.
S. Michikoshi and E. Kokubo (2014)
PITCH angle of galactic spiral arms
.
The Astrophysical Journal
787
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā174
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
D. Mondal and T. Chattopadhyay (2021)
Role of galactic bars in the formation of spiral arms: a study through orbital and escape dynamicsŌĆöi
.
Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy
133
(
9
).
External Links:
ISSN 1572-9478
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
B. Mutlu-Pakdil, M. S. Seigar, I. B. Hewitt, P. Treuthardt, J. C. Berrier, and L. E. Koval (2017)
The illustris simulation: supermassive black holeŌĆōgalaxy connection beyond the bulge
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
474
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā2594ŌĆō2606
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/474/2/2594/22802348/stx2935.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦II
.
D. Nelson, A. Pillepich, V. Springel, R. Pakmor, R. Weinberger, S. Genel, P. Torrey, M. Vogelsberger, F. Marinacci, and L. Hernquist (2019a)
First results from the TNG50 simulation: galactic outflows driven by supernovae and black hole feedback
.
MNRAS
490
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā3234ŌĆō3261
.
External Links:
Document
,
1902.05554
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
D. Nelson, V. Springel, A. Pillepich, V. Rodriguez-Gomez, P. Torrey, S. Genel, M. Vogelsberger, R. Pakmor, F. Marinacci, R. Weinberger, L. Kelley, M. Lovell, B. Diemer, and L. Hernquist (2019b)
The IllustrisTNG simulations: public data release
.
Computational Astrophysics and Cosmology
6
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā2
.
External Links:
Document
,
1812.05609
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦III
.
L. Newnham, K. M. Hess, K. L. Masters, S. Kruk, S. J. Penny, T. Lingard, and R. J. Smethurst (2020)
The hŌĆē┬Īscp┬┐i┬Ī/scp┬┐ morphology and stellar properties of strongly barred galaxies: support for bar quenching in massive spirals
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
492
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā4697ŌĆō4715
.
External Links:
ISSN 1365-2966
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
S. Oh, K. Oh, and S. K. Yi (2011)
BAR effects on central star formation and active galactic nucleus activity
.
The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series
198
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā4
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
P. A. Patsis (2006)
The stellar dynamics of spiral arms in barred spiral galaxies
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters
369
(
1
),
pp.┬ĀL56ŌĆōL60
.
External Links:
ISSN 1745-3925
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnrasl/article-pdf/369/1/L56/56929455/mnrasl_369_1_l56.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
A. Pillepich, D. Nelson, V. Springel, R. Pakmor, P. Torrey, R. Weinberger, M. Vogelsberger, F. Marinacci, S. Genel, A. van der Wel, and L. Hernquist (2019)
First results from the TNG50 simulation: the evolution of stellar and gaseous discs across cosmic time
.
MNRAS
490
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā3196ŌĆō3233
.
External Links:
Document
,
1902.05553
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦III
.
J. E. Pringle and C. L. Dobbs (2019)
The evolution of pitch angles of spiral arms
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
490
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā1470ŌĆō1473
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/490/1/1470/30152201/stz2694.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
A. B. Romeo, O. Agertz, and F. Renaud (2022)
The specific angular momentum of disc galaxies and its connection with galaxy morphology, bar structure, and disc gravitational instability
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
518
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā1002ŌĆō1021
.
External Links:
ISSN 1365-2966
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
M. Romero-G├│mez, E. Athanassoula, J. J. Masdemont, and C. Garc├Ła-G├│mez (2007)
The formation of spiral arms and rings in barred galaxies
.
Astronomy amp; Astrophysics
472
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā63ŌĆō75
.
External Links:
ISSN 1432-0746
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
Y. Rosas-Guevara, S. Bonoli, M. Dotti, D. Izquierdo-Villalba, A. Lupi, T. Zana, M. Bonetti, D. Nelson, V. Springel, L. Hernquist, and M. Vogelsberger (2022)
The evolution of the barred galaxy population in the TNG50 simulation
.
MNRAS
512
(
4
),
pp.┬Ā5339ŌĆō5357
.
External Links:
Document
,
2110.04537
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦II
,
┬¦III
.
Y. Rosas-Guevara, S. Bonoli, C. Misa Moreira, and D. Izquierdo-Villalba (2024)
The rise and fall of bars in disc galaxies from z = 1 to z = 0. The role of environment
.
A&A
684
,
pp.┬ĀA179
.
External Links:
Document
,
2401.15215
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
H. Salo, E. Laurikainen, R. Buta, and J. H. Knapen (2010)
BARS do drive spiral density waves
.
The Astrophysical Journal Letters
715
(
1
),
pp.┬ĀL56
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
R. H. Sanders and J. M. Huntley (1976)
Gas response to oval distortions in disk galaxies.
.
ApJ
209
,
pp.┬Ā53ŌĆō65
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
T. Schreiber (2000)
Measuring information transfer
.
Physical Review Letters
85
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā461ŌĆō464
.
External Links:
ISSN 1079-7114
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦IV.2
,
┬¦IV.2
.
M. P. Schwarz (1984)
How bar strength and pattern speed affect galactic spiral structure.
.
MNRAS
209
,
pp.┬Ā93ŌĆō109
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.1
.
M. S. Seigar and P. A. James (1998)
The structure of spiral galaxies ŌĆö ii. near-infrared properties of spiral arms
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
299
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā685ŌĆō698
.
External Links:
ISSN 1365-2966
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦II
.
J. A. Sellwood and J. J. Binney (2002)
Radial mixing in galactic discs
.
MNRAS
336
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā785ŌĆō796
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0203510
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
J. A. Sellwood and L. S. Sparke (1988)
Pattern speeds in barred spiral galaxies.
.
MNRAS
231
,
pp.┬Ā25PŌĆō31
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.2
.
J. A. Sellwood and A. Wilkinson (1993)
Dynamics of barred galaxies
.
Reports on Progress in Physics
56
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā173ŌĆō256
.
External Links:
Document
,
astro-ph/0608665
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦I
.
Semczuk, Marcin, Dehnen, Walter, Sch├Čnrich, Ralph, and Athanassoula, E. (2024)
Pattern speed evolution of barred galaxies in tng50
.
AA
692
,
pp.┬ĀA159
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
W. Seo and W. Kim (2014)
EFFECTS of spiral arms on star formation in nuclear rings of barred-spiral galaxies
.
The Astrophysical Journal
792
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā47
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
C. E. Shannon (1948)
A mathematical theory of communication
.
The Bell System Technical Journal
27
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā379ŌĆō423
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦IV.1
,
┬¦IV.1
.
L. A. Silva-Lima, L. P. Martins, P. R. T. Coelho, and D. A. Gadotti (2022)
Revisiting the role of bars in AGN fuelling with propensity score sample matching
.
A&A
661
,
pp.┬ĀA105
.
External Links:
Document
,
2203.07794
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
V. Springel (2010)
E pur si muove: Galilean-invariant cosmological hydrodynamical simulations on a moving mesh
.
MNRAS
401
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā791ŌĆō851
.
External Links:
Document
,
0901.4107
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
T. Storchi-Bergmann and A. Schnorr-M├╝ller (2019)
Observational constraints on the feeding of supermassive black holes
.
Nature Astronomy
3
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā48ŌĆō61
.
External Links:
ISSN 2397-3366
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
S. N. Vogel, S. R. Kulkarni, and N. Z. Scoville (1988)
Star formation in giant molecular associations synchronized by a spiral density wave
.
Nature
334
(
6181
),
pp.┬Ā402ŌĆō406
.
External Links:
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
N. Voglis, I. Stavropoulos, and C. Kalapotharakos (2006)
Chaotic motion and spiral structure in self-consistent models of rotating galaxies
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
372
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā901ŌĆō922
.
External Links:
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/372/2/901/3066051/mnras0372-0901.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦I
.
M. D. Weinberg (1985)
Evolution of barred galaxies by dynamical friction
.
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society
213
(
3
),
pp.┬Ā451ŌĆō471
.
External Links:
ISSN 0035-8711
,
Document
,
Link
,
https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article-pdf/213/3/451/18521750/mnras213-0451.pdf
Cited by:
┬¦I
,
┬¦V.3
.
S. Yu, L. C. Ho, and J. Wang (2021)
Spiral structure boosts star formation in disk galaxies
.
The Astrophysical Journal
917
(
2
),
pp.┬Ā88
.
External Links:
ISSN 1538-4357
,
Link
,
Document
Cited by:
┬¦I
.
T. Zana, A. Lupi, M. Bonetti, M. Dotti, Y. Rosas-Guevara, D. Izquierdo-Villalba, S. Bonoli, L. Hernquist, and D. Nelson (2022)
Morphological decomposition of TNG50 galaxies: methodology and catalogue
.
MNRAS
515
(
1
),
pp.┬Ā1524ŌĆō1543
.
External Links:
Document
,
2206.04693
Cited by:
┬¦III
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA