The Double-lined Eclipsing 𝛾 Doradus System AX Draconis in a 0.568-day Orbit
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
INTRODUCTION
II
TESS PHOTOMETRY, NEW ECLIPSE TIMES, AND LIGHT VARIATION
III
GROUND-BASED SPECTROSCOPY AND SPECTRAL ANALYSIS
IV
BINARY MODELING AND ABSOLUTE DIMENSIONS
V
PULSATION FREQUENCY ANALYSIS
VI
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Acknowledgements
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2606.05529v1 [astro-ph.SR] 04 Jun 2026
The Double-lined Eclipsing
γ
\gamma
Doradus System AX Draconis in a 0.568-day Orbit
Jae Woo Lee
Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
Min-Ji Jeong
Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
Kyeongsoo Hong
Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
Jang-Ho Park
Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
Pakakaew Rittipruk
National Astronomical Research Institute of Thailand, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand
Hye-Young Kim
Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute, Daejeon 34055, Republic of Korea
Abstract
For the near-contact binary AX Dra, we present the first time-series spectroscopy collected with the echelle spectrograph BOES.
From spectral analysis, we measured the projected rotation of
v
1
​
sin
⁡
i
v_{1}\sin i
=
120
±
21
120\pm 21
km s
-1
and effective temperature
of
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
=
7220
±
150
7220\pm 150
K for the brighter primary component, together with radial velocities (RVs) for both stars.
To obtain a consistent binary model, the RV curves were analyzed by combining the 2-min cadence photometric data observed in
the TESS sectors 15, 21, 22, and 41. The modeling indicates that AX Dra is a semi-detached system exhibiting
a total secondary eclipse, with the detached primary component having a large filling factor of 92 %. The system has masses
of
1.717
±
0.026
1.717\pm 0.026
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
and
0.804
±
0.014
0.804\pm 0.014
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
, radii of
1.541
±
0.020
1.541\pm 0.020
R
⊙
R_{\odot}
and
1.237
±
0.014
1.237\pm 0.014
R
⊙
R_{\odot}
,
luminosities of
5.78
±
0.50
5.78\pm 0.50
L
⊙
L_{\odot}
and
0.83
±
0.05
0.83\pm 0.05
L
⊙
L_{\odot}
, and a temperature difference of
Δ
\Delta
(
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
–
T
eff
,
2
T_{\rm eff,2}
) =
2263
±
163
2263\pm 163
K. Multi-frequency analyses of the TESS residual lights yielded
35 significant signals in the frequency range below 5 day
-1
. Among them, four frequencies of
f
1
f_{1}
,
f
2
f_{2}
,
f
3
f_{3}
, and
f
5
f_{5}
are independent
γ
\gamma
Dor pulsations of the primary star, for which two acceptable mode-identification solutions were obtained
using the frequency ratio method. These results suggest that AX Dra is the shortest-period double-lined eclipsing binary containing
a
γ
\gamma
Dor-type pulsator and that the pulsating primary is likely an accretor affected by mass transfer.
I
INTRODUCTION
Asteroseismology is used to probe the interior physics of pulsating stars, from the near-core region to the outer envelope,
ultimately to better understand stellar evolution.
δ
\delta
Sct and
γ
\gamma
Dor stars are intermediate-mass stars with
masses of 1.2
−
-
2.5
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
and spectral types of A
−
-
F, that display multi-period pulsations
(V. Antoci et al.,
2019
)
.
Their positions on the Hertzsprung–Russell (H–R) diagram are at the intersection of the Cepheid instability strip and
the main sequence band, and the blue edge of the
γ
\gamma
Dor domain overlaps with the red edge of the
δ
\delta
Sct one.
Space-based ultra-precise photometric surveys such as the
Kepler
mission indicate that many pulsating variables are
hybrid pulsators with two detected frequency regions, one lower (
γ
\gamma
Dor) and one higher (
δ
\delta
Sct) than
∼
\sim
5 day
-1
(e.g. A. Grigahcéne et al.,
2010
)
. These two types of pulsators exhibit significant differences in
their observed oscillation periods (
P
pul
P_{\rm pul}
) and pulsation constants (
Q
Q
)
(M. Breger,
2000
; G. Handler & R. R. Shobbrook,
2002
)
.
Double-lined eclipsing binaries (DEBs) are nearly the only stars whose fundamental parameters, such as masses and radii, can
be directly measured from radial velocities (RVs) and light curves. The absolute dimensions can be measured with a precision
of better than 3 % and are the basis for understanding stellar physics
(G. Torres et al.,
2010
)
. DEBs that show multiple pulsations
are of great value, because the synergy from both eclipses and pulsations can help improve the models of stellar structure and
evolution
(D. W. Kurtz,
2022
)
. We have been performing medium- and high-dispersion spectroscopic observations of pulsating EBs
using 2-m class telescopes
(K. Hong et al.,
2015
; P. Rittipruk et al.,
2025
)
.
In this article, we focus on the EB system AX Dra (TIC 148963419; TYC 4168-362-1; Gaia DR3 1680579406815027584;
V
V
=
+
+
10.90,
(
B
−
V
)
(B-V)
=
+
+
0.40), which was reported to be a possible variable by
R. Kippenhahn (
1955
)
and proposed
by
W. Strohmeier & R. Knigge (
1961
)
as a binary with an eclipsing period of about 0.568 days.
H. I. Kim et al. (
2004
)
reviewed
the historical details of this system prior to 2004, and conducted photometric studies from their multiband observations
during the 2001 and 2003 seasons and all available minimum times. As a consequence, they classified AX Dra as
a near-contact EB with a mass ratio of
q
q
= 0.629, an inclination angle of
i
i
= 82.8 deg, effective temperatures of
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
= 6850 K and
T
eff
,
2
T_{\rm eff,2}
= 4950 K, and a light contribution of
l
1
/
(
l
1
+
l
2
)
l_{1}/(l_{1}+l_{2})
= 0.85 in the
V
V
band,
and interpreted the seasonal light changes as a variable cool spot on the secondary companion. In addition,
H. I. Kim et al. (
2004
)
reported a cyclical variation with a period of 56 years and a semi-amplitude of 0.006 days from the eclipse timing
O
−
C
O-C
diagram,
and suggested that the light-travel-time effect caused by a tertiary companion (
M
3
​
sin
⁡
i
3
=
0.13
​
M
⊙
M_{3}\sin i_{3}=0.13M_{\odot}
) could
explain the observed variation. Since then, the short-period EB has been a quite neglected stellar system.
AX Dra is one of the spectral type A
−
-
F stars observed with the TESS’s 2-min cadence. These observations imply that
the TESS target could be a pulsating EB candidate. Here, we present the first spectroscopic observations of AX Dra, and
the results of its binary modeling and pulsation frequency analysis.
II
TESS PHOTOMETRY, NEW ECLIPSE TIMES, AND LIGHT VARIATION
AX Dra was observed as part of the TESS mission to find small exoplanets using the transit method. The 2-min sampling data of
the program target were obtained during four non-consecutive sectors 15, 21, 22, and 41 between August 2019 and August 2021.
The CROWDSAP factor over these sectors is 0.9924
±
\pm
0.0013 on average
(J. W. Lee et al.,
2022
)
. In this study, we took the stellar
fluxes from simple aperture photometry (
SAP
-
FLUX
) available at the MAST
1
1
1
https://archive.stsci.edu/
.
The observations can be found at
http://dx.doi.org/10.17909/1536-ze66
.
.
The detrending and normalization of the TESS data are identical to those in
J. W. Lee et al. (
2019
)
. The corrected fluxes were
transformed to magnitudes by requiring an average brightness at maximum light to be
T
P
T\rm_{P}
=
+
+
10.62
(M. Paegert et al.,
2022
)
.
In all, 74,036 observations were used for our analysis, with a time span of about 735 days (BJD 2,458,711.36
−
-
2,459,446.58).
They are shown as magnitude versus BJD on the top panel in Figure
1
, where the individual observations are represented
by different colored circles for each sector.
A total of 362 mid-eclipse times and their associated errors (181 for each eclipse type) were measured using the TESS observations
(K. K. Kwee & H. Van Woerden,
1956
)
. These appear in Table
1
, in which the timings of the primary and secondary eclipses are indicated
by Min I and Min II, respectively. We used all primary minima in a linear least-squares solution to get a new light ephemeris
(epoch
T
0
T_{0}
and period
P
orb
P_{\rm orb}
) suitable for the TESS photometric and our spectroscopic data, as follows:
Min I
=
BJD
​
2
,
458
,
711.514732
​
(
±
0.000029
)
+
0.568163473
​
(
±
0.000000045
)
​
E
.
\mbox{Min I}=\mbox{BJD}~2,458,711.514732(\pm 0.000029)+0.568163473(\pm 0.000000045)E.
(1)
The error of each coefficient is one standard deviation (1
σ
\sigma
). The phase-folded light curve of AX Dra is illustrated on
the second panel in Figure
1
. Our new
P
orb
P_{\rm orb}
is equivalent to the binary star’s frequency of
f
orb
f_{\rm orb}
= 1.7600568
±
\pm
0.0000001 day
-1
.
To find out the light variations of AX Dra, we measured the light levels in magnitudes at two light maxima (Max I and Max II) and
two eclipse minima (Min I and Min II) for each TESS sector. A summary of these measurements is presented in Table
2
. Here,
the BJD time is the median between the first and last observations used in each dataset. The magnitude differences between
the light levels were computed and they were plotted in Figure
2
. As indicated in this figure, AX Dra exhibits brightness
variations over time, which are most likely caused by temporal changes in starspot activity.
III
GROUND-BASED SPECTROSCOPY AND SPECTRAL ANALYSIS
To help determine the reliable fundamental parameters for AX Dra, we conducted phase-resolved spectroscopy using the echelle
spectrograph BOES, which is fiber-fed to the BOAO 1.8-m telescope
(K.-M. Kim et al.,
2007
)
. A total of 46 spectra were collected over
eight nights in 2022 June and November. The spectral resolution was selected to be
R
R
= 30,000 and the data were composed of
75 orders in the wavelength range of 3600
−
-
10,200
Å
\rm\AA
. Each exposure time was set to 960 s, no more than 0.02 of
the eclipsing period. This indicates that orbital smearing could be neglected. The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios for our target star
were typically between 30 and 50 on a continuum around the Mg IB triplet region. All observed spectra were pre-processed
(bias, flat-field corrections) and calibrated (wavelength calibration, normalization) using the
IRAF/ECHELLE
task.
H. I. Kim et al. (
2004
)
reported that the short-period eclipsing system AX Dra has a large difference of about 1900 K in temperature
between the components, and the faint secondary makes only a small contribution of about 15 % to the overall binary light in
the
V
V
band. For the components’ RV measurements, we constructed the phase-folded trailed spectra over the entire wavelength and
looked for the S-wave features resulting from the binary orbital motion
(see J. W. Lee et al.,
2018
)
. As a consequence,
measurable absorption lines were found in the Mg IB triplet region (
λ
\lambda
5167.33,
λ
\lambda
5172.70, and
λ
\lambda
5183.62).
The Mg IB triplets were broadened by the fast rotation of each star and blended with each other by the orbital motion.
Thus, the RVs for both components were derived using the broadening function
(S. M. Rucinski,
1992
; S. Rucinski,
1999
; S. M. Rucinski,
2002
)
in
the
RAVESPAN
software
(B. Pilecki et al.,
2017
)
. In the runs, the template spectra were imported from the model library made
available by
P. Coelho et al. (
2005
)
considering their temperatures. The resulting double-lined RVs are presented in Table
3
and Figure
3
.
For the projected rotation (
v
​
sin
v\sin
i
i
) and surface temperature (
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
) determination, the disentangling spectra of
AX Dra AB were constructed employing the
FDBinary
program
2
2
2
http://sail.zpf.fer.hr/fdbinary
(S. Ilijić et al.,
2004
)
. However, the reconstructed spectrum of the cool companion was insufficient to estimate the reliable values
of the two atmospheric parameters, because its light contribution and the S/N ratio were both low. The reconstructed spectrum of
the hotter primary was analyzed by means of the
iSpec
code
(S. Blanco-Cuaresma et al.,
2014
; S. Blanco-Cuaresma,
2019
)
3
3
3
https://www.blancocuaresma.com/s/iSpec
, which calculates the atmospheric parameters by minimizing
the
χ
2
\chi^{2}
difference between observations and synthetic models. For the synthetic spectra, we adopted the
SPECTRUM
radiative transfer code
(R. O. Gray & C. J. Corbally,
1994
)
, the ATLAS9 stellar model atmospheres
(R. L. Kurucz,
2005
)
, and the atomic line list
version 5.0
4
4
4
http://ges.roe.ac.uk/docs/GES_linelist_v5_report.pdf
from the Gaia-ESO survey
(U. Heiter et al.,
2015
)
.
Also, the surface gravity of
log
⁡
g
1
\log g_{1}
= 4.30 (see Table
5
) and the solar abundance were used for the model spectra.
The nine spectral regions of Ca I
λ
\lambda
4226, Fe I
λ
\lambda
4250, Fe I
λ
\lambda
4271, Cr I
λ
\lambda
4290,
H
γ
, Y II
λ
\lambda
4376, Fe I
λ
\lambda
4383, H
β
, and Mg IB triplet were chosen
from the Stellar Spectral Classification Atlas by
R. O. Gray & C. J. Corbally (
2009
)
.
These absorption lines help classify the star temperatures of spectral types A
−
-
F. Finding the optimal atmospheric parameters
resulted in
v
1
​
sin
v_{1}\sin
i
i
=
120
±
21
120\pm 21
km s
-1
and
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
=
7220
±
150
7220\pm 150
K. The micro- and macro-turbulent velocities
were calculated to be
v
mic
v_{\rm{mic}}
= 1.88 km s
-1
and
v
mac
v_{\rm{mac}}
= 17.6 km s
-1
from the
iSpec
code, respectively.
The chosen spectral regions of the disentangling spectrum are plotted with the best-fit model spectrum in Figure
4
.
IV
BINARY MODELING AND ABSOLUTE DIMENSIONS
As presented in Section 2, the TESS observations of AX Dra indicate that the target’s light has continuously varied, as was
especially prominent during primary eclipse. During this minimum phase, the pulsating primary star is deeply eclipsed, and
the companion star dominates the observed light. Given the secondary’s temperature and the starspot activity suggested by
previous studies (
(H. I. Kim et al.,
2004
)
), the enhanced variation during primary eclipse is likely associated with time-dependent
brightness modulation caused by spot activity on the secondary component. In addition, the light curve shows a depth difference
of about 0.65 mag between the two eclipses, while the secondary minimum appears flat-bottomed. These features indicate that
the more massive primary component (AX Dra A) being eclipsed at Min I is hotter and larger than its companion (AX Dra B).
To derive a unique solution for AX Dra, our spectroscopic measurements were simultaneously solved with all archival TESS data
observed at 2-min cadence. For the combined modeling of these data, we introduced the
Wilson-Devinney
(W-D) code
(R. E. Wilson & E. J. Devinney,
1971
; W. Van Hamme & R. E. Wilson,
2007
)
that adequately models the geometrical distortion of each star and permits
proximity effects for RVs. Here, the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to AX Dra A and B, respectively.
The surface temperature of the AX Dra primary was set to the value of
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
= 7220
±
\pm
150 K, based on
our spectral analysis (Section
III
). Both bolometric albedo (
A
1
A_{1}
) and gravity-darkening (
g
1
g_{1}
) parameters
for AX Dra A were held to typical values of 1.0, while the
A
2
A_{2}
and
g
2
g_{2}
values for AX Dra B were fitted during our W-D run.
The logarithmic law was applied for the non-linear limb darkening, and the
x
x
and
y
y
coefficients were initialized with
updated values of
W. Van Hamme (
1993
)
. With the measured rotation of
v
1
v_{1}
sin
\sin
i
i
=
120
±
21
120\pm 21
km s
-1
,
the rotation parameter of AX Dra A was assigned as
F
1
F_{1}
= 0.87
±
\pm
0.15. For the lobe-filling companion, a synchronous rotation
of
F
2
F_{2}
= 1.0 was used. We performed binary star modeling using the semi-detached and contact modes of the W-D program.
The results confirmed that AX Dra is in a semi-detached configuration, with the lower-mass component filling its Roche lobe.
The binary model parameters are summarized in Table
4
, where each parameter’s error was obtained by applying
the error estimation method of
J. Southworth & D. M. Bowman (
2022
)
. The light and RV curves from our solutions are depicted as
red solid lines in Figures
1
and
3
.
Detailed analyses combining our echelle spectra with space-based photometric data indicate that AX Dra is a short-period EB
with a temperature difference of 2263 K and a primary-star fill-out factor of 92 %. Previous studies have shown that
short-period EBs with intermediate-mass pulsators can exhibit a broad range of Roche-lobe filling factors
(e.g. X. B. Zhang et al.,
2013
)
,
while temperature differences between components may also vary substantially depending on the binary configuration. In this context,
AX Dra is particularly noteworthy as a strongly interacting near-contact binary that provides an interesting environment for
investigating the pulsational properties discussed in the following sections.
The combined model parameters listed in Table
4
are well suited to provide direct and accurate absolute dimensions of
the binary star. This calculation process is the same as that previously performed by
J. W. Lee et al. (
2018
,
2021
)
. The resultant
parameters are presented in Table
5
. To compute the distance to AX Dra, we used the apparent magnitude and color index
of the system to be
V
V
= +10.90
±
\pm
0.06 and (
B
−
V
B-V
) = +0.40
±
\pm
0.08
(E. Høg et al.,
2000
)
, respectively. The intrinsic color index
was estimated to be (
B
−
V
B-V
)
0
= +0.30
±
\pm
0.03 from
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
= 7220
±
\pm
150 K
(P. J. Flower,
1996
; M. J. Pecaut & E. E. Mamajek,
2013
)
,
and then derived
E
E
(
B
−
V
B-V
) =
+
+
0.10. Finally, our obtained photometric-spectroscopic distance was 381
±
\pm
19 pc, which agrees
well with 388
±
\pm
2 pc measured from the Gaia trigonometric parallax of 2.580
±
\pm
0.011 mas
(Gaia Collaboration et al.,
2023
)
.
V
PULSATION FREQUENCY ANALYSIS
The fundamental parameters in Table
5
suggest that the AX Dra A primary is an F0-type main-sequence star located where
the
δ
\delta
Sct and
γ
\gamma
Dor instability regions on the H–R diagram overlap each other
(e.g. K. Uytterhoeven et al.,
2011
; D. R. Xiong et al.,
2016
)
.
Then, this object would be a candidate for a hybrid pulsator, which is expected to show both pressure (
p
p
) and gravity (
g
g
) modes.
In the third panel of Figure
1
, the residual lights from our W-D model exhibit a rather large scatter of
±
\pm
0.02 mag.
This scatter is primarily attributed to multiple oscillations with a characteristic period of roughly 0.47 days. In addition to
the eclipse and pulsation effects, the TESS observations may be convoluted with light changes due to local surface inhomogeneities,
such as starspots. Because of these, there is a notable discrepancy in brightness between the four sectors as shown in Figure
1
.
For better analysis of the pulsations, we made the normal points for each sector from the observed TESS data, evenly binned with
a phase interval of 0.002
(J. W. Lee et al.,
2023
)
. The individual residuals after removing the mean curves were used to obtain amplitude
spectra up to the Nyquist limit of 360 day
-1
with the
PERIOD04
(P. Lenz & M. Breger,
2005
)
. The mean-curve residuals
are plotted against phase in the bottom panel of Figure
1
and BJD in Figure
5
.
First of all, following the pre-whitening process conducted by
J. W. Lee et al. (
2014
)
, we separately analyzed each sector’s residuals
in the orbital phases 0.13
−
-
0.87, excluding the data from the primary eclipses. The results are illustrated in the first to
fourth panels of Figure
6
and reveal the presence of multi-period pulsations having dominant signals at
∼
\sim
1.38 day
-1
and
∼
\sim
2.14 day
-1
. No conspicuous signals were seen in the frequency domain greater than 5 day
-1
. These imply
that AX Dra A is a
γ
\gamma
Dor-like pulsator. Then, we applied the
PERIOD04
software to the secondary- and outside-eclipse
residuals of the entire TESS data, and detected a total of 35 frequency signals
(M. Breger et al.,
1993
)
presented in Table
6
.
Of the extracted frequencies, possible combinations were found within 1.5 times the Rayleigh frequency of 1/
Δ
​
T
\Delta T
(G. L. Loumos & T. J. Deeming,
1978
)
. Here we used a time span of
Δ
​
T
\Delta T
= 215 days, excluding S41 with a long observation gap of more than
one year since S22
(M. Breger & K. M. Bischof,
2002
)
. The search result is presented in the remark column of Table
6
. Seven frequencies,
denoted by superscript
c
c
in this table, were detected in all four sectors. We think the four significant signals (
f
1
f_{1}
,
f
2
f_{2}
,
f
3
f_{3}
,
f
5
f_{5}
)
except for combination frequencies are considered independent oscillating modes excited in AX Dra A.
VI
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In 2021, we identified the near-contact system AX Dra as a possible pulsating EB using high-cadence (2 min) TESS data.
To characterize its physical properties in detail, we subsequently included this target in our observing program and performed
high-dispersion spectroscopic observations with BOES on the 1.8-m telescope. From the echelle spectra,
the double-lined RVs were measured and the atmosphere parameters of AX Dra A were determined to be
v
1
​
sin
v_{1}\sin
i
i
= 120
±
\pm
21 km s
-1
and
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
= 7220
±
\pm
150 K. Our spectroscopic measurements were modeled with the ultra-precise photometric data obtained at
four TESS sectors. The synthetic modeling directly calculated the fundament parameters of the binary target without making any assumptions.
The masses, radii, and temperatures for each component are accurate to within 2 %. The EB-based distance of 381
±
\pm
19 pc yields
the parallax of 2.62
±
\pm
0.13 mas, which is well-matched with the Gaia value of 2.580
±
\pm
0.011 mas
(Gaia Collaboration et al.,
2023
)
.
The projected rotational velocity,
v
1
​
sin
⁡
i
v_{1}\sin i
, is effectively identical to the true equatorial velocity (
v
1
v_{1}
) given the nearly
edge-on configuration of the system (
i
i
= 89.07 deg). The measured value is marginally lower than the synchronous one of
v
1
,
sync
v_{\rm 1,sync}
= 137.3
±
\pm
1.8 km s
-1
, suggesting subsynchronous rotation. This departure from synchronous rotation is uncommon in short-period
semi-detached binaries like AX Dra, where strong tidal interactions are expected to enforce rapid spin–orbit synchronization.
While angular momentum loss via magnetic braking and differential rotation due to structural changes may contribute to this behavior
(J. C. Lurie et al.,
2017
; D. P. Fleming et al.,
2019
; G. Koenigsberger et al.,
2021
; M. Hobson-Ritz et al.,
2025
)
, other mechanisms should also be considered.
In particular, ongoing or recent mass transfer and the associated redistribution or loss of angular momentum within the system may
lead to temporary departures from synchrony
(J. F. Sepinsky et al.,
2007
,
2010
; T. M. Tauris & E. P. J. van den Heuvel,
2006
)
. Alternatively, the presence of
a tertiary companion and its dynamical interaction with the inner binary could also induce subsynchronous rotation
(J. Fuller & C. Felce,
2023
)
.
Indeed,
H. I. Kim et al. (
2004
)
reported a quasi-sinusoidal variation in the eclipse timing residuals and suggested
a possible light-travel-time effect caused by a tertiary body. Although our spectroscopic analysis and combined light-curve modeling reveal
no significant evidence for a third component, the existence of a faint low-mass circumbinary companion cannot be completely excluded.
Time-series photometry from TESS reveals temporal variations in the brightness of AX Dra. These luminosity changes are likely produced
by a combination of pulsations and additional effects such as starspots. To extract oscillating frequencies more reliably, we generated
the mean light curves for each sector using a phase bin of 0.002 and subtracted them from the observed TESS data. The resulting residual
lights were then analyzed in detail. We extracted 35 significant signals, among which the four frequencies of
f
1
f_{1}
,
f
2
f_{2}
,
f
3
f_{3}
, and
f
5
f_{5}
were classified as possible pulsation modes originating from the AX Dra primary, located in the instability regions of A
−
-
F dwarfs
on the H–R diagram. Using the frequency (period)-density relation of
Q
i
Q_{i}
=
f
i
−
1
f_{i}^{-1}
ρ
1
/
ρ
⊙
\sqrt{\rho_{1}/\rho_{\odot}}
, we computed the pulsation
constants
Q
Q
for the low frequencies presented in the third column of Table
7
. The oscillating signals of 1.383
−
-
2.137 day
-1
and the
Q
Q
values of 0.320
−
-
0.494 days are typical of
γ
\gamma
Dor-type
g
g
modes with frequencies of
f
<
f<
5 day
-1
and pulsation
constants of
Q
>
Q>
0.23 days
(G. W. Henry et al.,
2005
; K. Uytterhoeven et al.,
2011
)
.
The radial order (
n
n
) and spherical degree (
ℓ
\ell
) of the
g
g
-mode frequencies can be identified by means of the frequency ratio
method (FRM) presented in
A. Moya et al. (
2005
)
and applied in our previous studies
(J. W. Lee et al.,
2014
; J. W. Lee,
2016
; J. W. Lee & J.-H. Park,
2018
)
. We attempted
mode identification for the four independent frequencies detected in AX Dra with this method. The FRM is typically applicable to
γ
\gamma
Dor stars exhibiting at least three independent oscillation frequencies and having rotational velocities less than 70 km s
-1
.
Similar to the pulsating component of V404 Lyr
(J. W. Lee et al.,
2014
)
, the AX Dra A primary is a relatively fast rotator with
v
1
​
sin
⁡
i
=
120
±
21
v_{1}\sin i=120\pm 21
km s
-1
, well beyond this criterion. In addition, the pulsating component is likely affected by
binary interaction, including mass transfer, which may further limit the applicability of the standard FRM approach because this method
was originally developed under the assumption of single pulsating stars.
Adopting the procedure of
J. W. Lee et al. (
2014
)
, we set the frequency ratio error to a rather large value of
±
\pm
0.02 and looked for
the model frequency ratios (
f
i
f_{i}
/
f
1
f_{1}
)
model
that best fit the observed values of (
f
i
f_{i}
/
f
1
f_{1}
)
obs
. We found
two acceptable sets of mode identifications within the adopted uncertainties, indicating that the FRM solutions are not unique.
Rapid rotation and binary interaction may limit the applicability of the FRM method and distort the observed pulsation spectra.
These two solutions are summarized in Table
7
. Solution 1 corresponds to
(
n
,
ℓ
)
=
(
29
,
3
)
(n,\ell)=(29,3)
,
(
45
,
3
)
(45,3)
,
(
42
,
3
)
(42,3)
, and
(
40
,
3
)
(40,3)
,
while Solution 2 gives
(
29
,
3
)
(29,3)
,
(
18
,
1
)
(18,1)
,
(
17
,
1
)
(17,1)
, and
(
16
,
1
)
(16,1)
. The Brunt-Väisälä frequency integrals derived from
Solutions 1 and 2 are 659.5
±
\pm
2.4
μ
\mu
Hz and 659.9
±
\pm
2.1
μ
\mu
Hz, respectively. Both values agree well with the model value of
𝒥
⊔
⟨
⌉
≀
\cal J_{\rm theo}
≈
\approx
660
μ
\mu
Hz corresponding to physical parameters of
log
\log
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
= 3.86, [Fe/H] = 0.0, and
1.6 M
⊙
in the
𝒥
−
\cal J-
log
\log
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
diagram
(A. Moya et al.,
2005
)
.
AX Dra belongs to the eclipsing
γ
\gamma
Dor star group and is one of the close binaries exhibiting both the shortest orbital period and
the largest fill-out factor among the known members of this class
(C. Ibanoglu et al.,
2018
; P. Gaulme & J. A. Guzik,
2019
; G. Li et al.,
2020
; J. Southworth & T. Van Reeth,
2022
; Ö. Çakirli et al.,
2025
)
.
In such a near-contact EB, the initially more massive component is expected to fill its Roche lobe and transfer mass to its companion,
which then accretes the material and becomes the present more massive
γ
\gamma
Dor pulsator. In this context, mass transfer and
tidal interactions between the AX Dra components may have contributed to the excitation of the
γ
\gamma
Dor oscillations identified in
this study. The orbital-to-pulsation frequency ratio
f
orb
f_{\rm orb}
:
f
1
f_{\rm 1}
is close to, but not exactly, a 5:6 commensurability.
This may indicate tidal interaction or near-resonance between the orbital motion and the dominant oscillation mode. Our results indicate
that this system provides a promising laboratory for investigating the interplay between binarity and stellar pulsation.
This work includes echelle spectra obtained with BOES and 2-minute cadence photometric data from the TESS mission. Constructive comments
from the anonymous referee greatly improved the clarity and quality of this paper. We acknowledge the use of the SIMBAD database operated
at CDS, Strasbourg, France, and support from KASI grant 2026-1-904-01.
References
V. Antoci et al. (2019)
Antoci, V., Cunha, M. S., Bowman, D. M., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 4040, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz2787
S. Blanco-Cuaresma (2019)
Blanco-Cuaresma, S. 2019, MNRAS, 486, 2075, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stz549
S. Blanco-Cuaresma et al. (2014)
Blanco-Cuaresma, S., Soubiran, C., Heiter, U., et al. 2014, A&A, 569, A111, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201423945
M. Breger (2000)
Breger, M. 2000, in ASP Conf. Ser. 210, Delta Scuti and Related Stars, ed. M. Breger, & M. H. Montgomery (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 3
M. Breger & K. M. Bischof (2002)
Breger, M., & Bischof, K. M. 2002, A&A, 385, 537, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20020124
M. Breger et al. (1993)
Breger, M., Stich, J., Garrido, R., et al. 1993, A&A, 271, 482, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:1993271482
Ö. Çakirli et al. (2025)
Çakirli, Ö., Hoyman, B., Oz̈darcan, O., & Bilir, S. 2025, MNRAS, 533, 2058 doi:
10.1093/mnras/staf330
P. Coelho et al. (2005)
Coelho, P., Barbuy, B., Melendez, J., Sciavon, R. P., & Castilho, B. V. 2005, A&A, 443, 735, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20053511
P. J. Flower (1996)
Flower, P. J. 1996, ApJ, 469, 355, doi:
10.1086/177785
D. P. Fleming et al. (2019)
Fleming, D. P., Barnes, R., Davenport, J. R. A., & Luger, R. 2019, ApJ, 881, 88, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/ab2ed2
J. Fuller & C. Felce (2023)
Fuller, J., & Felce, C. 2023, MNRAS, 527, L103, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stad3053
Gaia Collaboration et al. (2023)
Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari A., Brown A. G. A., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A1, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202243940
P. Gaulme & J. A. Guzik (2019)
Gaulme, P., & Guzik, J. A. 2019, A&A, 630, A106, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201935821
R. O. Gray & C. J. Corbally (1994)
Gray, R. O., & Corbally, C. J. 1994, AJ, 107, 742, doi:
10.1086/116893
R. O. Gray & C. J. Corbally (2009)
Gray, R. O., & Corbally, C. J. 2009, Stellar Spectral Classification (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press)
A. Grigahcéne et al. (2010)
Grigahcéne, A., Antoci, V., Balona, L., et al. 2010, ApJ, 713, L192, doi:
10.1088/2041-8205/713/2/L192
G. Handler & R. R. Shobbrook (2002)
Handler, G., & Shobbrook, R. R. 2002, MNRAS, 333, 251, doi:
10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.05401.x
U. Heiter et al. (2015)
Heiter, U., Lind, K., Asplund, M., et al. 2015, PhyS, 90, 054010, doi:
10.1088/0031-8949/90/5/05401
G. W. Henry et al. (2005)
Henry, G. W., Fekel, F. C., & Henry, S. M. 2005, AJ, 129, 2815, doi:
10.1086/429876
M. Hobson-Ritz et al. (2025)
Hobson-Ritz, M., Birky, J., Peterson, L., et al. 2025, ApJ, 990, 124, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/adf10d
E. Høg et al. (2000)
Høg, E., Fabricius, C., Makarov, V. V., et al. 2000, A&A, 355, 27, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20020249
K. Hong et al. (2015)
Hong, K., Lee, J. W., Kim, S.-L., et al. 2015, AJ, 150, 131, doi:
10.1088/0004-6256/150/4/131
S. Ilijić et al. (2004)
Ilijić, S., Hensberge, H., Pavlovski, K., & Freyhammer, L. M. 2004, in ASP Conf. Ser. 318, Spectroscopically and Spatially Resolving the Components of the Close Binary Stars, ed. R. Hilditch, H. Hensberge, & K. Pavlovski (San Francisco: ASP), 111
C. Ibanoglu et al. (2018)
Ibanoglu, C., Çakirli, Ö., & Sipahi, E., 2018, New Astron., 62, 70, doi:
10.1016/j.newast.2018.01.004
H. I. Kim et al. (2004)
Kim, H. I., Lee, J. W., Kim, C. H., et al. 2004, PASP, 116, 931, doi:
10.1086/425606
K.-M. Kim et al. (2007)
Kim, K.-M., Han, I., Valyavin, G. G., et al. 2007, PASP, 119, 1052, doi:
10.1086/521959
R. Kippenhahn (1955)
Kippenhahn, R. 1955, Kl. Veröff. Remeis-Sternwarte, Bamberg, No. 9
G. Koenigsberger et al. (2021)
Koenigsberger, G., Moreno, E., & Langer, N. 2021, A&A, 653, A127, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/202039369
D. W. Kurtz (2022)
Kurtz, D. W. 2022, ARAA, 60, 31, doi:
10.1146/annurev-astro-052920-094232
R. L. Kurucz (2005)
Kurucz, R. L. 2005, MSAIS, 8, 14
K. K. Kwee & H. Van Woerden (1956)
Kwee, K. K., & Van Woerden, H. 1956, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands, 12, 327
J. W. Lee (2016)
Lee, J. W. 2016, ApJ, 833, 170, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/170
J. W. Lee & J.-H. Park (2018)
Lee, J. W., & Park, J.-H. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 4693, doi:
10.1093/mnras/sty2153
J. W. Lee et al. (2021)
Lee, J. W., Hong, K., & Kim, H.-Y. 2021, AJ, 161, 129, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/abd631
J. W. Lee et al. (2022)
Lee, J. W., Hong, K., Kim, H.-Y., & Park, J.-H. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 4702, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stac2151
J. W. Lee et al. (2018)
Lee, J. W., Hong, K., Koo, J.-R., & Park J.-H., 2018, AJ, 155, 5, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/aa947e
J. W. Lee et al. (2023)
Lee, J. W., Hong, K., Park, J.-H., Wolf, M., & Kim, D.-J. 2023, AJ, 165, 159, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/acbe9d
J. W. Lee et al. (2014)
Lee, J. W., Kim, S.-L., Hong, K., Lee, C.-U., & Koo, J.-R. 2014, AJ, 148, 37, doi:
10.1088/0004-6256/148/2/37
J. W. Lee et al. (2019)
Lee, J. W., Kristiansen, M., & Hong, K. 2019, AJ, 157, 223, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ab1a3b
P. Lenz & M. Breger (2005)
Lenz, P., & Breger, M. 2005, Comm. Asteroseismology, 146, 53, doi:
10.1553/cia146s53
G. Li et al. (2020)
Li, G., Guo, Z., Fuller, J., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 4363, doi:
10.1093/mnras/staa2266
G. L. Loumos & T. J. Deeming (1978)
Loumos, G. L., & Deeming, T. J. 1978, Ap&SS, 56, 285, doi:
10.1007/BF01879560
J. C. Lurie et al. (2017)
Lurie, J. C., Vyhmeister, K., Hawley, S. L., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 250, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/aa974d
A. Moya et al. (2005)
Moya, A., Suárez, J. C., Amado P. J., et al. 2005, A&A, 432, 189, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361:20041752
M. Paegert et al. (2022)
Paegert, M., Stassun, K. G., Collins, K. A., et al. 2022, VizieR Online Data Catalog, IV/39
M. J. Pecaut & E. E. Mamajek (2013)
Pecaut, M. J., & Mamajek, E. E. 2013, ApJS, 208, 9, doi:
10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/9
B. Pilecki et al. (2017)
Pilecki, B., Gieren, W., Smolec, S., et al. 2017, ApJ, 842, 110, doi:
10.3847/1538-4357/aa6ff7
P. Rittipruk et al. (2025)
Rittipruk, P., Hong, K., Lee, J. W., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 66, doi:
10.3847/1538-3881/ad99ce
S. Rucinski (1999)
Rucinski, S. 1999, in ASP Conf. Ser. 185, Precise Stellar Radial Velocities, ed. J. B. Hearnshaw & C. D. Scarfe (San Francisco, CA: ASP), 82, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9807327
S. M. Rucinski (1992)
Rucinski, S. M. 1992, AJ, 104, 1968, doi:
10.1086/181071
S. M. Rucinski (2002)
Rucinski, S. M. 2002, AJ, 124, 1746, doi:
10.1086/342342
J. F. Sepinsky et al. (2007)
Sepinsky, J. F., Willems, B., Kalogera, V., & Rasio, F. A. 2007, ApJ, 667, 1170, doi:
10.1086/520911
J. F. Sepinsky et al. (2010)
Sepinsky, J. F., Willems, B., Kalogera, V., & Rasio, F. A. 2010, ApJ, 724, 546, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/724/1/546
J. Southworth & D. M. Bowman (2022)
Southworth, J., & Bowman, D. M. 2022, The Observatory, 142, 161, doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2205.08841
J. Southworth & T. Van Reeth (2022)
Southworth, J., & Van Reeth, T., 2022, MNRAS, 515, 2755, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stac1993
W. Strohmeier & R. Knigge (1961)
Strohmeier, W., & Knigge, R. 1961, Veröff. Remeis-Sternwarte, Bamberg 5, No. 11, 3
T. M. Tauris & E. P. J. van den Heuvel (2006)
Tauris, T. M., & van den Heuvel, E. P. J. 2006, in in Compact stellar X-ray
sources, ed. W. H. G. Lewin & M. van der Klis (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press), 623 doi:
10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0303456
G. Torres et al. (2010)
Torres, G., Andersen, J., & Giménez, A. 2010, A&AR, 18, 67, doi:
10.1007/s00159-009-0025-1
K. Uytterhoeven et al. (2011)
Uytterhoeven, K., Moya, A., Grigahcéne, A., et al. 2011, A&A, 534, A125, doi:
10.1051/0004-6361/201117368
W. Van Hamme (1993)
Van Hamme, W. 1993, AJ, 106, 209, doi:
10.1086/116788
W. Van Hamme & R. E. Wilson (2007)
Van Hamme, W., & Wilson, R. E. 2007, ApJ, 661, 1129, doi:
10.1086/517870
R. E. Wilson & E. J. Devinney (1971)
Wilson, R. E., & Devinney, E. J. 1971, ApJ, 166, 605, doi:
10.1086/150986
D. R. Xiong et al. (2016)
Xiong, D. R., Deng, L., Zhang, C., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 457, 3163, doi:
10.1093/mnras/stw047
X. B. Zhang et al. (2013)
Zhang, X. B., Luo, C. Q., & Fu, J. N. 2013, ApJ, 777, 77, doi:
10.1088/0004-637X/777/1/77
Figure 1:
TESS observations of AX Dra distributed in BJD (top panel) and orbital phase (second panel). Different colored circles
for each sector are individual measures, and the red solid curve represents the model curve obtained with our W-D synthesis.
The third and bottom panels show the corresponding residuals from the binary model and from each sector’s mean curve with a phase
interval of 0.002, respectively.
Figure 2:
Variations in magnitude differences with time between four characteristic phases (Max I, Min I, Max II and Min II) for AX Dra.
Figure 3:
RV curves of AX Dra with fitted models. The blue and green circles are our measurements for the primary and secondary
stars, respectively, and the red solid curves represent the results from a consistent light and RV curve analysis with the W-D code.
The gray line in the upper panel denotes the system velocity of
−
-
1.5 km s
-1
. The lower panel shows the residuals between
observations and models.
Figure 4:
Selected spectral regions of the primary star AX Dra A. The gray circles are the disentangling spectrum obtained with
the
FDBinary
code. The red lines denote the synthetic spectrum with
T
eff
,
1
T_{\rm eff,1}
= 7220 K,
log
\log
g
1
g_{1}
= 4.30,
and,
v
1
v_{1}
sin
\sin
i
i
= 120 km s
-1
.
Figure 5:
Light curve residuals from the mean curves distributed in BJD. The lower panel presents a short section of the residuals
marked using the inset box of the upper panel. The red synthetic curve is computed from the 35-frequency fit to the data between
orbital phases 0.13 and 0.87.
Figure 6:
PERIOD04
periodograms for the light curve residuals except for the primary eclipse phase. The first to fourth panels
show the amplitude spectra for the residuals in each sector, while the bottom panel is obtained using the entire TESS data.
Table 1:
TESS Eclipse Times of AX Dra
BJD
Error
Min
2,458,711.51517
±
\pm
0.00005
I
2,458,711.79868
±
\pm
0.00007
II
2,458,712.08286
±
\pm
0.00002
I
2,458,712.36813
±
\pm
0.00014
II
2,458,712.65058
±
\pm
0.00005
I
2,458,712.93626
±
\pm
0.00015
II
2,458,713.21897
±
\pm
0.00003
I
2,458,713.50403
±
\pm
0.00009
II
2,458,713.78772
±
\pm
0.00004
I
2,458,714.07127
±
\pm
0.00006
II
Note. — This table is available in its entirety in machine-readable form. A portion is shown here for guidance regarding its form and content.
Table 2:
Light levels of AX Dra at four different phases
Sector
Median Time
Min I at 0.0
P
P
Max I at 0.25
P
P
Min II at 0.5
P
P
Max II at 0.75
P
P
(BJD)
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
(mag)
15
2,458,724.38449
11.575
±
\pm
0.006
10.617
±
\pm
0.009
10.927
±
\pm
0.005
10.621
±
\pm
0.009
21
2,458,884.11004
11.582
±
\pm
0.007
10.618
±
\pm
0.010
10.920
±
\pm
0.005
10.622
±
\pm
0.010
22
2,458,912.90849
11.586
±
\pm
0.006
10.617
±
\pm
0.007
10.920
±
\pm
0.004
10.623
±
\pm
0.007
41
2,459,433.28136
11.558
±
\pm
0.007
10.625
±
\pm
0.010
10.915
±
\pm
0.005
10.616
±
\pm
0.009
Average
11.575
±
\pm
0.011
10.619
±
\pm
0.003
10.921
±
\pm
0.004
10.620
±
\pm
0.003
Table 3:
Radial velocities of AX Dra
†
{\dagger}
†
†
footnotetext:
V
1
V_{1}
and
V
2
V_{2}
represent the measured RVs of the primary and secondary stars, respectively, and
Δ
​
V
1
\Delta V_{1}
and
Δ
​
V
2
\Delta V_{2}
are their 1
σ
\sigma
-values.
BJD
V
1
V_{1}
Δ
​
V
1
\Delta V_{1}
V
2
V_{2}
Δ
​
V
2
\Delta V_{2}
(km s
-1
)
(km s
-1
)
(km s
-1
)
(km s
-1
)
2,459,732.0262
−
89.9
-89.9
3.0
190.5
190.5
8.2
2,459,732.0377
−
97.2
-97.2
2.9
205.5
205.5
8.9
2,459,732.0491
−
102.7
-102.7
2.4
199.1
199.1
12.1
2,459,732.0606
−
106.0
-106.0
8.5
210.7
210.7
22.9
2,459,732.0713
−
111.2
-111.2
7.4
214.7
214.7
14.0
2,459,732.0851
−
110.1
-110.1
3.3
224.8
224.8
11.7
2,459,732.0965
−
106.1
-106.1
3.2
222.7
222.7
2.4
2,459,732.1080
−
109.5
-109.5
7.7
208.7
208.7
21.8
2,459,732.1195
−
97.9
-97.9
4.4
191.0
191.0
15.1
2,459,732.1309
−
90.7
-90.7
3.0
187.5
187.5
5.1
2,459,732.1424
−
82.7
-82.7
3.8
182.6
182.6
11.0
2,459,733.1349
−
65.1
-65.1
4.4
148.0
148.0
8.8
2,459,733.1464
−
79.1
-79.1
4.1
161.7
161.7
9.9
2,459,734.0182
100.4
100.4
4.2
−
187.5
-187.5
2.3
2,459,734.0898
104.7
104.7
2.5
−
219.7
-219.7
2.9
2,459,734.1013
101.8
101.8
1.8
−
207.8
-207.8
10.9
2,459,734.1242
96.2
96.2
3.2
−
185.1
-185.1
4.5
2,459,734.1471
86.3
86.3
1.5
2,459,741.9816
99.3
99.3
4.5
−
207.1
-207.1
5.7
2,459,741.9931
109.6
109.6
3.8
−
214.4
-214.4
5.8
2,459,742.0045
104.7
104.7
3.7
−
212.9
-212.9
7.9
2,459,742.0160
106.8
106.8
3.5
−
224.6
-224.6
4.8
2,459,742.0275
111.9
111.9
2.5
−
215.7
-215.7
6.5
2,459,742.0618
91.5
91.5
3.7
−
208.8
-208.8
8.0
2,459,742.0733
90.0
90.0
4.0
−
199.9
-199.9
5.2
2,459,907.2752
74.5
74.5
8.1
−
146.6
-146.6
9.5
2,459,907.2867
86.7
86.7
5.5
−
163.5
-163.5
16.8
2,459,907.2982
87.5
87.5
10.6
−
185.8
-185.8
15.1
2,459,907.3105
104.1
104.1
2.5
−
199.8
-199.8
2.1
2,459,907.3220
102.4
102.4
2.2
−
214.3
-214.3
3.1
2,459,907.3335
102.0
102.0
2.3
−
223.6
-223.6
5.2
2,459,908.2753
−
85.9
-85.9
3.5
2,459,908.2868
−
67.9
-67.9
4.9
164.6
164.6
8.2
2,459,908.2983
−
59.3
-59.3
5.3
150.7
150.7
10.2
2,459,908.3098
−
47.9
-47.9
2.3
128.0
128.0
8.8
2,459,908.3213
−
37.3
-37.3
2.3
2,459,908.3327
−
24.3
-24.3
2.2
2,459,908.3443
−
11.9
-11.9
2.4
2,459,908.3558
0.3
0.3
2.2
2,459,910.2835
72.2
72.2
5.2
−
155.2
-155.2
6.8
2,459,910.2950
72.4
72.4
5.6
−
131.0
-131.0
9.0
2,459,910.3065
79.1
79.1
3.8
−
92.5
-92.5
9.6
2,459,910.3180
77.6
77.6
4.2
−
69.0
-69.0
7.9
2,459,910.3295
79.2
79.2
1.9
−
49.2
-49.2
3.7
2,459,910.3410
30.2
30.2
1.7
2,459,910.3525
−
60.9
-60.9
1.7
Table 4:
Light and Velocity Parameters of AX Dra
^a
^a
footnotetext:
Mean volume radius.
Parameter
Primary (A)
Secondary (B)
T
0
T_{0}
(BJD)
2,458,711.514718
±
\pm
0.000027
P
orb
P_{\rm orb}
(day)
0.568163762
±
\pm
0.000000041
a
a
(
R
⊙
R_{\odot}
)
3.927
±
\pm
0.025
γ
\gamma
(km s
-1
)
−
-
1.5
±
\pm
8.4
K
1
K_{1}
(km s
-1
)
111.6
±
\pm
1.3
K
2
K_{2}
(km s
-1
)
238.2
±
\pm
1.9
q
q
(=
M
2
/
M
1
M_{2}/M_{1}
)
0.4685
±
\pm
0.0066
i
i
(deg)
89.07
±
\pm
0.11
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
(K)
7220
±
\pm
150
4957
±
\pm
65
Ω
\Omega
3.078
±
\pm
0.023
2.815
F
F
0.87
±
\pm
0.15
1.0
A
A
1.0
0.573
±
\pm
0.033
g
g
1.0
0.327
±
\pm
0.052
X
bol
X_{\rm bol}
,
Y
bol
Y_{\rm bol}
0.642, 0.259
0.643, 0.160
x
x
,
y
y
0.505
±
\pm
0.010, 0.277
0.633
±
\pm
0.032, 0.184
l
/
(
l
1
+
l
2
)
l/(l_{1}+l_{2})
0.8432
±
\pm
0.0057
0.1568
r
r
(pole)
0.3804
±
\pm
0.0035
0.2947
±
\pm
0.0027
r
r
(point)
0.4233
±
\pm
0.0061
0.4227
±
\pm
0.0035
r
r
(side)
0.3917
±
\pm
0.0040
0.3075
±
\pm
0.0029
r
r
(back)
0.4065
±
\pm
0.0047
0.3400
±
\pm
0.0028
r
r
(volume)
a
0.3934
±
\pm
0.0045
0.3153
±
\pm
0.0030
Table 5:
Absolute Parameters of AX Dra
Parameter
Primary (A)
Secondary (B)
M
M
(
M
⊙
M_{\odot}
)
1.717
±
\pm
0.026
0.804
±
\pm
0.014
R
R
(
R
⊙
R_{\odot}
)
1.541
±
\pm
0.020
1.237
±
\pm
0.014
log
\log
g
g
(cgs)
4.297
±
\pm
0.013
4.158
±
\pm
0.013
ρ
\rho
(
ρ
⊙
\rho_{\odot}
)
0.470
±
\pm
0.020
0.425
±
\pm
0.017
v
sync
v_{\rm sync}
(km s
-1
)
137.3
±
\pm
1.8
110.2
±
\pm
1.3
v
v
sin
\sin
i
i
(km s
-1
)
120
±
\pm
21
T
eff
T_{\rm eff}
(K)
7220
±
\pm
150
4957
±
\pm
65
L
L
(
L
⊙
L_{\odot}
)
5.78
±
\pm
0.50
0.83
±
\pm
0.05
M
bol
M_{\rm bol}
(mag)
2.825
±
\pm
0.095
4.935
±
\pm
0.062
BC (mag)
0.034
±
\pm
0.001
−
-
0.312
±
\pm
0.027
M
V
M_{\rm V}
(mag)
2.791
±
\pm
0.095
5.247
±
\pm
0.068
Distance (pc)
381
±
\pm
19
Table 6:
Multi-frequency analysis results for AX Dra
a
^a
^a
footnotetext:
Frequencies are listed in order of detection.
^b
^b
footnotetext:
Calculated in a range of 5 day
-1
around each frequency.
^c
^c
footnotetext:
Detected in all four sectors.
Frequency
Amplitude
Phase
S/N
b
Remark
(day
-1
)
(mmag)
(rad)
f
1
f_{1}
c
2.13680
±
\pm
0.00001
7.34
±
\pm
0.14
1.61
±
\pm
0.05
91.69
γ
\gamma
Dor
−
-
type
f
2
f_{2}
c
1.38336
±
\pm
0.00001
3.93
±
\pm
0.15
1.28
±
\pm
0.11
45.92
γ
\gamma
Dor
−
-
type
f
3
f_{3}
c
1.47095
±
\pm
0.00002
1.97
±
\pm
0.15
6.19
±
\pm
0.22
23.04
γ
\gamma
Dor
−
-
type
f
4
f_{4}
c
0.75348
±
\pm
0.00003
1.37
±
\pm
0.15
1.84
±
\pm
0.32
15.49
f
1
−
f
2
f_{1}-f_{2}
f
5
f_{5}
c
1.55140
±
\pm
0.00003
1.22
±
\pm
0.15
2.60
±
\pm
0.35
14.42
γ
\gamma
Dor
−
-
type
f
6
f_{6}
2.15100
±
\pm
0.00003
1.15
±
\pm
0.14
3.92
±
\pm
0.35
14.44
3
​
f
3
−
3
​
f
4
3f_{3}-3f_{4}
f
7
f_{7}
1.49282
±
\pm
0.00003
1.26
±
\pm
0.15
1.30
±
\pm
0.34
14.79
f
8
f_{8}
2.12282
±
\pm
0.00004
0.86
±
\pm
0.14
1.51
±
\pm
0.47
10.69
2
​
f
1
−
f
6
2f_{1}-f_{6}
f
9
f_{9}
c
3.14339
±
\pm
0.00003
1.00
±
\pm
0.12
4.67
±
\pm
0.35
14.50
f
orb
+
f
2
f_{\rm orb}+f_{2}
f
10
f_{10}
c
4.27360
±
\pm
0.00003
0.74
±
\pm
0.09
4.23
±
\pm
0.37
13.62
2
​
f
1
2f_{1}
f
11
f_{11}
2.09611
±
\pm
0.00004
0.83
±
\pm
0.14
6.20
±
\pm
0.48
10.34
2
​
f
8
−
f
6
2f_{8}-f_{6}
f
12
f_{12}
1.39900
±
\pm
0.00005
0.81
±
\pm
0.15
5.55
±
\pm
0.53
9.45
f
6
−
f
4
f_{6}-f_{4}
f
13
f_{13}
2.28151
±
\pm
0.00005
0.71
±
\pm
0.13
6.05
±
\pm
0.55
9.04
f
14
f_{14}
2.17617
±
\pm
0.00005
0.78
±
\pm
0.14
1.02
±
\pm
0.52
9.73
f
10
−
f
11
f_{10}-f_{11}
f
15
f_{15}
2.06778
±
\pm
0.00007
0.53
±
\pm
0.14
1.06
±
\pm
0.77
6.54
f
16
f_{16}
2.22440
±
\pm
0.00007
0.51
±
\pm
0.14
4.08
±
\pm
0.77
6.49
f
3
+
f
4
f_{3}+f_{4}
f
17
f_{17}
0.66580
±
\pm
0.00008
0.49
±
\pm
0.15
4.29
±
\pm
0.91
5.54
f
1
−
f
3
f_{1}-f_{3}
f
18
f_{18}
1.99221
±
\pm
0.00009
0.43
±
\pm
0.14
2.06
±
\pm
0.93
5.38
f
10
−
f
13
f_{10}-f_{13}
f
19
f_{19}
2.34501
±
\pm
0.00007
0.55
±
\pm
0.13
5.24
±
\pm
0.70
7.11
f
20
f_{20}
1.60747
±
\pm
0.00008
0.48
±
\pm
0.14
5.55
±
\pm
0.88
5.72
f
21
f_{21}
2.04387
±
\pm
0.00008
0.48
±
\pm
0.14
1.47
±
\pm
0.85
5.89
f
22
f_{22}
1.00656
±
\pm
0.00008
0.52
±
\pm
0.15
5.43
±
\pm
0.83
6.05
f
9
−
f
1
f_{9}-f_{1}
f
23
f_{23}
1.67971
±
\pm
0.00010
0.38
±
\pm
0.14
1.82
±
\pm
1.11
4.52
f
19
−
f
17
f_{19}-f_{17}
f
24
f_{24}
1.53669
±
\pm
0.00007
0.53
±
\pm
0.15
0.61
±
\pm
0.80
6.23
f
9
−
f
20
f_{9}-f_{20}
f
25
f_{25}
1.37443
±
\pm
0.00008
0.50
±
\pm
0.15
3.16
±
\pm
0.86
5.83
f
26
f_{26}
2.89028
±
\pm
0.00009
0.39
±
\pm
0.12
5.48
±
\pm
0.93
5.41
f
1
+
f
4
f_{1}+f_{4}
f
27
f_{27}
1.96910
±
\pm
0.00009
0.43
±
\pm
0.14
0.45
±
\pm
0.95
5.28
f
28
f_{28}
0.76773
±
\pm
0.00010
0.42
±
\pm
0.15
1.43
±
\pm
1.06
4.74
f
6
−
f
2
f_{6}-f_{2}
f
29
f_{29}
0.30798
±
\pm
0.00009
0.44
±
\pm
0.15
3.10
±
\pm
1.02
4.93
f
15
−
f
orb
f_{15}-f_{\rm orb}
f
30
f_{30}
2.20688
±
\pm
0.00007
0.55
±
\pm
0.14
2.72
±
\pm
0.73
6.87
f
10
−
f
15
f_{10}-f_{15}
f
31
f_{31}
0.07357
±
\pm
0.00011
0.37
±
\pm
0.15
4.46
±
\pm
1.21
4.13
f
3
−
f
12
f_{3}-f_{12}
f
32
f_{32}
2.53294
±
\pm
0.00010
0.36
±
\pm
0.13
3.73
±
\pm
1.05
4.76
f
16
+
f
29
f_{16}+f_{29}
f
33
f_{33}
1.78101
±
\pm
0.00011
0.34
±
\pm
0.14
5.59
±
\pm
1.22
4.12
f
32
−
f
4
f_{32}-f_{4}
f
34
f_{34}
1.50777
±
\pm
0.00009
0.43
±
\pm
0.15
5.62
±
\pm
0.98
5.11
2
​
f
4
2f_{4}
f
35
f_{35}
2.23690
±
\pm
0.00010
0.37
±
\pm
0.14
5.04
±
\pm
1.06
4.71
f
28
+
f
3
f_{28}+f_{3}
Table 7:
γ
\gamma
Dor-type Pulsation Properties of AX Dra
Frequency
Q
Q
(
f
i
f_{i}
/
f
1
f_{1}
)
obs
mode (
n
n
,
ℓ
\ell
)
(
f
i
f_{i}
/
f
1
f_{1}
)
model
Δ
\Delta
(
f
i
f_{i}
/
f
1
f_{1}
)
obs-model
𝒥
≀
⌊
∫
\cal J_{\rm obs}
(day
-1
)
(days)
(
μ
\mu
Hz)
FRM Solution 1
f
1
f_{1}
2.13680
0.320
(29, 3)
661.65
f
2
f_{2}
1.38336
0.494
0.6474
(45, 3)
0.6484
−
-
0.0010
660.68
f
3
f_{3}
1.47095
0.465
0.6884
(42, 3)
0.6941
−
-
0.0057
656.19
f
5
f_{5}
1.55140
0.440
0.7260
(40, 3)
0.7284
−
-
0.0024
659.51
Average
−
-
0.0030
±
\pm
0.0025
659.51
±
\pm
2.38
FRM Solution 2
f
1
f_{1}
2.13680
0.320
(29, 3)
661.65
f
2
f_{2}
1.38336
0.494
0.6474
(18, 1)
0.6510
−
-
0.0036
658.00
f
3
f_{3}
1.47095
0.465
0.6884
(17, 1)
0.6882
−
-
0.0002
661.84
f
5
f_{5}
1.55140
0.440
0.7260
(16, 1)
0.7299
−
-
0.0039
658.15
Average
−
-
0.0024
±
\pm
0.0023
659.91
±
\pm
2.12
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA