Data-driven surrogate models for forecasting experimentally measured fluid flows
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I
Introduction
II
Experimental Methods
II.1
Learning problem: cylinder wakes
II.1.1
Data acquisition
II.2
Triple decomposition
II.3
Surrogate modeling
II.3.1
Fully convolutional networks
II.3.2
U-Net
II.3.3
Fourier neural operators
II.3.4
Dynamic mode decomposition
II.3.5
Evaluation speed
III
Results
III.1
Propagating fluid dynamics over extended forecast horizons
III.2
Model performance across Reynolds numbers
IV
Conclusion
V
Acknowledgments
VI
Author Contributions
A
Hyperparameter and Additional Figures
References
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2606.10848v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 10 Jun 2026
Data-driven surrogate models for forecasting experimentally measured fluid flows
Peter I Renn
Division of Engineering and Applied Science
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
Emily H Palmer
Albert Nerken School of Engineering
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art
New York, NY, USA
Cong Wang
College of Engineering
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA, USA
Morteza Gharib
Division of Engineering and Applied Science
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
Abstract
Data-driven modeling shows significant promise for faster-than-real-time forecasting of fluid flows. For real-world engineering applications (e.g., flow control), models must contend with limited, imperfect, and incomplete experimental measurements. In this work, we present an analysis of data-driven surrogate models trained to forecast the time-evolution of experimentally measured cylinder wakes in the subcritical vortex shedding regime. Using a dataset of two-dimensional, two-component particle image velocimetry measurements, we train fully convolutional neural networks, U-Nets, Fourier neural operators, and dynamic mode decomposition-based models to forecast the development of experimentally measured velocity fields. To characterize data-driven approaches contending with transient flow features and limited, imperfect observations, the development of predictions over extended forecast horizons is examined at a fixed Reynolds number (
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
). Next, models are trained at a range of Reynolds numbers (
R
​
e
=
Re=
230 to
R
​
e
=
Re=
2920) to investigate the impact of increasingly turbulent and three-dimensional flow phenomena, and the challenges associated with measuring them, on forecast quality. We find that experimentally trained surrogate models can provide meaningful predictions over short time horizons, propagate low-frequency dynamics over longer forecast periods, and achieve faster-than-real-time evaluation. However, the data-driven models struggle to preserve transient flow features and high-frequency energy content when faced with noisy measurements and incomplete state observations. This emphasizes the underlying challenges that remain for data-driven modeling approaches to effectively contend with fluid dynamics in real-world engineering applications, where observations are often imperfect and limited.
I
Introduction
Data-driven models have the potential to change the way engineered systems interact with non-linear fluid dynamics by enabling real-time reconstruction, prediction, and control of fluid flow
[
5
]
. While not suitable as replacements for physics-based numerical solvers commonly used in computational fluid dynamics, the evaluation speed of data-driven surrogate models could facilitate meaningful short-term predictive forecasts of fluid flows in faster-than-real-time. Such models could help realize predictive flow-control capabilities in many real-world engineering applications.
A wide array of data-driven methods for predicting the time evolution of fluid flows have been proposed. For example,
Srinivasan
et al.
[
45
]
and
Nakamura
et al.
[
31
]
applied neural network approaches to computational simulations of turbulent shear layers and three-dimensional channel flows, respectively. In both cases, the data-driven models match statistical quantities of the flow well but struggle to make accurate instantaneous predictions.
Wu
et al.
[
52
]
proposed a multi-resolution convolutional interaction network to make temporal predictions for cylinder flow data from eddy-viscosity turbulence models in the moderate subcritical regime, but the model was outperformed by basic linear dynamic mode decomposition for a cylinder flow with constant inlet velocity.
Fukami
et al.
[
11
]
combined a convolutional neural network auto-encoder with sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics (i.e., SINDy) to model laminar cylinder flow data generated by direct numerical simulation, as well as a shear flow model. This method was capable of learning the latent dynamics of both cases, however, the resulting models are sensitive to noisy observations and require problem-specific handling of learning parameters.
Wang
et al.
[
47
]
proposed a deep learning framework inspired by the hybrid RANS-LES coupling, where velocity fields are decomposed into three different scales to improve prediction accuracy.
Particular interest has been shown in predicting fluid flows through operator learning frameworks, such as Fourier neural operators (FNOs)
[
25
]
.
Wen
et al.
[
48
]
successfully applied an FNO variant for predicting pressure buildup and gas saturation in multiphase flows.
Li
et al.
[
24
]
proposed another FNO variant for predicting isotropic turbulence, finding long-term predictions to be stable.
Han
et al.
[
13
]
developed a hybrid neural operator network to predict unsteady fluid flows, outperforming vanilla FNO by integrating convolutional long short-term memory and Fourier layers into a single model.
Despite this interest, previous approaches have been largely limited to training on and predicting numerically-generated data. While some works have addressed the impact of artificially injected noise, these considerations do not fully represent the challenges associated with applying data-driven models to predict real-world fluid flows. There exist fundamental limitations with respect to observing experimental fluid flows; for example, measurements can often provide only in-plane dynamics (e.g., two-dimensional information in a three-dimensional flow) with limited resolution in both time and space, inherently failing to provide the full state information.
In this paper, we examine data-driven methods as real-time capable surrogate models for the prediction of experimentally measured turbulent cylinder wakes. We seek to elucidate the relationship between data-driven model predictions, flow physics, and the limitations of observability in an experimental setting. Using two-dimensional two-component particle image velocimetry (2D2C-PIV) data, common data-driven models are trained to recursively forecast the time evolution of turbulent cylinder wakes. We specifically consider the performance across popular architectures such as fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs), U-Nets, FNOs, and dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) based models. First we explore the characteristics of model forecasts over an extended prediction horizon equivalent to a full vortex shedding cycle with a fixed Reynolds (
R
​
e
Re
) number of
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
. Here we explore how the quality varies over the trajectory of the predictions, including considerations of planar turbulent kinetic energy derived from the fluctuating component of the velocity fields. Then, performance is evaluated at a range of Reynolds numbers (
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
to
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
) in the wake-transition and subcritical vortex shedding regime, where turbulent energy content and three-dimensional effects are increasing
[
51
]
. Here we examine how data-driven models contend with the challenges associated with incomplete and imperfect observations in this regime, as well as the flow physics associated with high accumulated error. We find that data-driven models show considerable promise for predicting large-scale dynamics over short time horizons, with faster-than-real-time evaluation. However, none of the models tested maintain accurate predictions of the fine-scale dynamics over long prediction horizons, highlighting the both the challenges associated with partially observable observations and the limitations of current methods.
II
Experimental Methods
II.1
Learning problem: cylinder wakes
As one of the most well known and visually striking unsteady flows, vortex shedding in the wake of a cylinder has often been used to demonstrate data-driven methods in fluid mechanics
[
15
,
14
,
30
]
. The vortex shedding process has been studied in detail for decades, with several comprehensive review papers on the subject
[
51
]
. The phenomena is first observed in the wake of a cylinder at a Reynolds number of approximately 50, at which point an instability occurs in the previously steady recirculation region of the wake. This instability results in a famously beautiful and well-ordered pattern of laminar alternating vortices convecting downstream away from the cylinder, known as a von Kármán vortex street. There has been some variation observed in defining the start of the transition from laminar to turbulent wakes, but it is generally placed around
R
​
e
Re
= 190, at which point small-scale three-dimensional instabilities form and the transition to turbulence begins
[
50
]
. The behavior of cylinder wakes from
R
​
e
Re
= 300 to
R
​
e
Re
= 200 000 was labeled the “irregular range” by
Roshko [
42
]
(otherwise known as the sub-critical regime). This regime is characterized by increasing three-dimensional effects, irregular velocity fluctuations, and the transition of the outer shear layer
[
51
]
.
Figure 1:
Snapshots of velocity fields across the Reynolds numbers tested. Colorbar scales given in m/s.
The experiments in this work were performed across a range of Reynolds numbers, from
R
​
e
Re
= 230 to
R
​
e
Re
= 2920, which can be seen in figure
1
. As expected, the flow appears increasingly turbulent and irregular with increasing Reynolds number. Speckling can be observed in the velocity fields measured at higher Reynolds numbers, which is attributable to an increase in high-frequency three-dimensional energy content that the measurements are unable to resolve. This setting enables evaluation of model performance across fluid phenomena that is increasingly challenging to both model and observe, while maintaining a common dominant flow feature in the primary vortex shedding periodicity.
II.1.1
Data acquisition
Data was collected using a free-surface water tunnel with test section dimensions of 0.15 m (W)
×
\times
0.15 m (H)
×
\times
0.61 m (L). An acrylic cylinder of diameter
D
D
= 9.53
×
\times
10
-3
m was mounted to span the walls of the test section approximately equidistant from the free surface and the tunnel floor. The cylinder aspect ratio was approximately 15.7. Tests were performed at flow speeds ranging from
U
U
= 0.02 m s
-1
to
U
U
= 0.40 m s
-1
.
Figure 2:
Schematic of the imaging region of interest, outlined by the black dashed line, relative to the water tunnel and cylinder.
Figure
2
depicts the geometry of the recorded region of interest relative to the tunnel boundaries and cylinder. The streamwise length of this region (
L
1
L_{1}
) was 0.125 m (
≈
13
​
D
\approx 13D
) with spanwise height (
L
​
2
L2
) of 0.084 m (
≈
9
​
D
\approx 9D
). The flow in this region was illuminated by a continuous laser sheet approximately centered between the walls of the tunnel. High-speed video was recorded via an IDT XSM-3520 high-speed camera, with resolution 2144 px
×
\times
1440 px. To maintain a near-constant non-dimensional inter-sample time at various tunnel speeds, the frame rate of the camera was adjusted between Reynolds numbers. The non-dimensional formation time, given as
t
∗
=
U
​
t
/
D
t^{*}=Ut/D
, was used to normalize the flow development between subsequent velocity fields across Reynolds numbers
[
19
]
. Commercial software (PIVview by PIVTEC) was used to calculate velocity fields from image pairs. During processing, the interrogation window was set to
32
×
32
32\times 32
pixels with a 50% overlap. The resulting velocity fields have grid spacing of
9.388
×
10
−
4
​
m
(
<
0.1
​
D
)
9.388\times 10^{-4}\ \text{m}\ (<0.1D)
. A portion of the dataset used in this work is available and described in further detail in
Renn
et al.
[
39
]
.
It is well established that three-dimensional flow physics are present in the range of Reynolds numbers tested
[
51
]
. Additionally, the primary vortices were observed to be shed at an oblique angle relative to the cylinder; oblique shedding is often attributable to pressure differentials from asymmetries in cylinder end conditions
[
12
]
. While qualitatively similar to parallel vortex shedding, oblique shedding has implications with respect to the shear layer instability and the Strouhal-Reynolds number relationship when compared to parallel shedding
[
12
,
37
]
. Further, in canonical parallel vortex shedding, the shear layer begins to transition at
R
​
e
≈
1000
Re\approx 1000
with the development of secondary streamwise vortices in the recirculation region; in oblique shedding conditions, as studied here, the shear layer instability may be delayed to
R
​
e
≈
2600
Re\approx 2600
[
51
,
36
]
. In addition to the challenges associated with increased measurement error from out-of-plane velocities, the non-dimensional time (
t
∗
t^{*}
) between Reynolds numbers does not guarantee equivalent Strouhal periods.
II.2
Triple decomposition
In the analysis presented, a decomposition of both the measured and predicted velocity fields is used to gain physical insight into surrogate model performance. Given the periodic nature of cylinder wakes, the mean, periodic, and fluctuating components were separated in the velocity velocity fields following
Reynolds and Hussain [
40
]
:
u
i
=
u
¯
i
+
u
~
i
+
u
i
′
.
u_{i}=\bar{u}_{i}+\tilde{u}_{i}+u^{\prime}_{i}.
(1)
Here,
u
¯
i
\bar{u}_{i}
is the time-averaged mean velocity field,
u
~
i
\tilde{u}_{i}
the periodic component, and
u
i
′
u^{\prime}_{i}
represents random fluctuations in the flow. The time-averaged component was calculated by taking the average over all trajectories in the test dataset.
Proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) was used to estimate the periodic component of the velocity field. POD enables modal decomposition of dynamics onto an orthogonal basis, background and details for which may be found in
Berkooz
et al.
[
2
]
. In periodic flows, such as a cylinder wake, the most energetic modes represent the regular periodic fluctuations (e.g., vortex shedding). Reconstructing the velocity fields with only these most energetic modes provides an approximate phase-averaged velocity field representing the periodic component of the flow.
Figure 3:
(a) Cumulative energy of POD modes for
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
. (b) Corresponding velocity field reconstruction with varying number of modes.
The cumulative energy of the first 100 modes and an example velocity field reconstructions can be seen in figure
3
a. This decomposition followed a basic snapshot POD approach. As expected, nearly half the energy is contained in the first two modes alone. The
N
=
2
N=2
and
N
=
10
N=10
reconstructions seen in figure
3
b show qualitatively similar fields, with the
N
=
100
N=100
case showing more fine-scale spatial detail. In the context of bluff body wakes, the first two modes have been shown to effectively capture dominant vortex-shedding behavior for the purposes of triple decomposition, even at high Reynolds numbers
[
35
,
33
]
. Following this, as well as the distribution of energy observed, the periodic component of the flow field was estimated using the POD reconstruction from the first two modes alone. This was done separately for all Reynolds numbers and models.
The irregular fluctuating term (
u
i
′
u^{\prime}_{i}
) was then isolated by subtracting both the time-averaged and phase-averaged components from the full velocity field. The models were trained to predict the full velocity field rather than any one component from the triple decomposition. The decomposition then was exclusively used during analysis.
II.3
Surrogate modeling
In this study, data-driven models are used as surrogates to forecast the time evolution of the
x
−
x-
and
y
−
y-
component velocity fields in the wake of a circular cylinder at a range Reynolds numbers. Separate models are trained at each Reynolds number to isolate the forecasting performance given the flow conditions at that point.
Four common data-driven model architectures were chosen for this study to represent a range of modalities surrogate modeling performance: fully convolutional neural networks (FCNs), U-Nets, Fourier neural operators (FNOs), and dynamic mode decomposition (DMD). U-Nets and FCNs were included to represent common, generalized deep learning frameworks. While U-Nets are often found to surpass FCN performance, FCNs remain commonly deployed for surrogate modeling of fluid flows
[
1
]
. As neural operators, FNOs were included as one of the most common architectures in the growing field of operator learning. DMD, which is not a deep learning method, has been a common modeling tool in the fluid mechanics community for decades and provides important context for the performance of the nonlinear network-based models
[
44
]
.
For each Reynolds number, three models of each type (i.e., FCN, U-Net, FNO, DMD) were trained with different initializations to gauge mean performance. A simple mean squared error (MSE) loss was used to train the deep learning models. The deep learning models were trained on a set of 3488 time sequences with a test set of 832 sequences at each Reynolds number. Each time sequence contains 11 time-steps which are unique to that sequence (i.e., sequences had no overlap). The DMD model was trained with a subset of this dataset, as discussed below.
Using a single measured instantaneous two-dimensional two-component velocity field as input, the data-driven models can recursively predict forward an arbitrary number of time-steps. During training, the models recursively predicted ten time-steps, corresponding to roughly one-third of a full vortex shedding cycle. The MSE loss was calculated over the full forecast horizon the deep learning models (i.e., FCN, U-Net, FNO). This multi-step recursive structure improves prediction accuracy over long forecast horizons when compared to training on a single prediction step.
Given the limitations associated with experimental quantitative flow visualizations, these instantaneous velocity fields do not fully define the state of the turbulent dynamics. The finite resolution, planar observation, and absence of out-of-plane velocity data all prevent the measurements from observing the full state of the dynamics. This limitation is often mitigated by the use of time-delay embeddings, whereby including a short history of observations as input may better define the system dynamics
[
34
]
. However, this work maintains a single observation input to reflect common limitations of laser repetition rates in many double-pulsed PIV systems, where multiple time-resolved measurements would not be available. A comparison of the deep learning models using a time-delay embedding with a two time-step input is included in the appendix (figure
11
). While the time-delay embedding slightly improves performance across models, the relative performance remains largely unchanged. It is possible that longer time-delay embeddings may further improve performance, however further investigations in this matter lie beyond the scope of the current work.
II.3.1
Fully convolutional networks
Fully convolutional networks (FCN), introduced by
Long
et al.
[
28
]
, are networks comprised entirely of convolutional layers. These layers, commonly used for learning tasks involving images, perform convolution operations between filters and the channels of an input array (i.e., an image). The output of these convolutions is known as an activation map. Through the learning process, the filters change shape to improve activation relative to local features contained in the data. Each filter in a convolutional layer corresponds to a channel in the output of that layer, typically resulting in the output shape having less spatial resolution and more channels.
Here, we applied an FCN with an “encoder-decoder” structure. In this case, the subsequent outputs of the first several layers form an encoder, and have progressively less spatial resolution and more channels. We perform additional convolutions on the latent representation following the encoder portion, where the spatial information of the initial image is most dense. This is followed by a decoder portion, where the output can be returned to the desired dimension through a series of transposed convolutional layers. The hyperparameters used for FCN can be found in the appendix (table
2
).
II.3.2
U-Net
One of the most popular network architectures in modern deep learning, U-Net was first introduced by
Ronneberger
et al.
[
41
]
for biomedical image segmentation. U-Nets can be structured with convolutional layers similar to FCNs, but also feature skip connections where the output of several layers of the encoder portion of the network are directly concatenated onto the input of corresponding layers in the decoder portion of the network. This helps the network maintain spatial information that may have been otherwise lost at the bottleneck between encoder and decoder. The hyperparameters used for U-Net can be found in the appendix (table
3
).
II.3.3
Fourier neural operators
Neural operators are distinct from standard neural networks (e.g., FCNs and U-Nets) for their ability to directly approximate operators from data alone
[
22
]
. This includes operators that map between sets of functions related by a family of PDEs (e.g., the Navier-Stokes equations), making these methods of particular interest for problems in fluid mechanics.
Introduced by
Li
et al.
[
25
]
, Fourier neural operators (FNOs) use unique Fourier layers to achieve guaranteed universal approximation for continuous operators
[
21
]
. These Fourier layers consist of two paths: non-linear activation functions as found in classical neural networks, and a linear transform of the input signal performed in Fourier space. The non-linear activation function path serves to approximate local nonlinearities, and the Fourier transform path serves as a global integral operator to account for non-local effects in real space. The paths are combined when passed forward, and the networks are trained using the same principles as neural networks. The hyperparameters used for FNO can be found in the appendix (table
4
).
II.3.4
Dynamic mode decomposition
Dynamic mode decomposition (DMD), introduced by
Schmid [
43
]
, is a method of data-driven reduced-order modeling. A departure from the network-based deep learning methods discussed above, DMD allows for the development of reduced-order linear models of nonlinear dynamical systems. Especially popular in fluid mechanics applications, DMD enables the numerical estimation of the Koopman operator, which itself is typically formulated to represent the evolution of a dynamical system by a single timestep. For this work, we used a variant of DMD introduced by
Héas and Herzet [
16
]
with SVD factorization of rank 250
[
18
]
. This rank value of 250 was chosen through iterative experiments; higher rank factorizations saw diminishing returns. More data-efficient than deep learning models, the DMD models were trained with only 200 of the ten time-step sequences (i.e., 2000 samples total).
II.3.5
Evaluation speed
Table 1:
Average model evaluation time on an NVIDIA A100. All models evaluate faster than the minimum inter-sample time (5 ms). Note that deep learning models may be evaluated even faster if compiled.
Model
Evaluation Time
U-Net
2.52 ms
FNO
3.13 ms
DMD
1.31 ms
FCN
2.02 ms
Table
1
shows the respective mean evaluation times of the models. The velocity fields are predicted in increments of non-dimensional time approximately equal to
t
∗
≈
0.18
t^{*}\approx 0.18
. As the non-dimensional time was held constant, the corresponding physical time between snapshots varies with Reynolds number, from
5
5
ms (
R
e
=
2920
)
Re=2920)
to
62.5
62.5
ms (
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
). Given a minimum inter-sample time of
5
5
ms (
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
), table
1
shows that all surrogate models tested could produce at least a single time-step forecast faster-than-real-time, potentially enabling future model-based flow control applications.
III
Results
This section presents an analysis of data-driven surrogate models, namely U-Net, FNO, DMD, and FCN, in the context of time-forecasting experimentally measured turbulent cylinder wakes. We first examine performance across extended forecast horizons at a fixed Reynolds number (
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
), comparing the temporal dynamics of the fluid flow in predicted and experimentally-measured velocity fields. Following this we explore how surrogate models contend with increasingly turbulent dynamics by characterizing performance across Reynolds numbers ranging from the start of the three-dimensional wake transition (
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
) to boundary layer transition (
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
). In addition to quantifying performance relative to flow physics, we examine the impact of three-dimensional turbulent fluctuations in the context of observing and measuring the state of the system. Finally, the model performance is considered simultaneously across Reynolds numbers and forecast horizons.
III.1
Propagating fluid dynamics over extended forecast horizons
While recursive application can enable arbitrary forecast horizons for surrogate models, compounding errors can limit the utility of and distort dynamics in long prediction sequences. Figure
4
shows example predictions and corresponding error fields of the spanwise velocity component for all four model types at the first and tenth step in a recursive forecast at a fixed Reynolds number of
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
.
Figure 4:
Actual and predicted y-component velocity fields with error for all models. The results of the (a) first and (b) tenth recursive prediction for
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
are shown.
Generated directly from the experimental measurements, the predictions at the first time-step (figure
4
a) generally show low error and a high level of spatial detail. However, by the tenth time-step (figure
4
b), the forecast velocity fields appear significantly less detailed than the actual field, and more significant error has accumulated. The error in the velocity fields appears high frequency, which is consistent with the apparent smoothness of the predictions.
The FCN surrogate is a notable exception to this pattern, with the first time-step prediction already appearing quite smooth with high error, and the tenth time-step prediction appearing qualitatively similar to the first.
Quantifying the performance as a function of forecast length, figure
5
shows the normalized error of the four models at the same Reynolds number (
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
) across a thirty time-step horizon. This is approximately equivalent to a full vortex shedding cycle.
Figure 5:
Mean error per time-step for various models at
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
.
As shown in figure
5
, the error accumulates most rapidly over the first several prediction time-steps for the U-Net, FNO, and DMD models. However repeated recursive application of the surrogate model does not accelerate error accumulation but rather stabilizes it, as indicated by the reduction in error rate-of-change at longer time horizons. The FCN forecast is an outlier from this trend, with a large initial error and a moderate linear increase in error across the forecast horizon. As a result, the FCN surrogates show the lowest change in error per time-step for the majority of the prediction horizon, and achieve a lower absolute error than the DMD surrogate models after 14 prediction time-steps.
While the FCN surrogate models appear as an outlier, their performance provides important insights into the abilities of surrogate models in general, especially with respect to experimental measurements. The high initial value and linear increase in error are consistent with the overly smooth predictions produced by the FCN model in figure
4
, suggesting that FCN surrogates learn to avoid spatial detail and predict only the dominant vortex shedding pattern. This is unsurprising; the FCN is effectively structured as an autoencoder, with the velocity field reduced to a lower dimensional representation and passed through the bottleneck before reconstruction. The FCN is therefore poorly suited for preserving spatial detail, with MSE loss pushing the weights to preserve only the most dominant, low-frequency dynamics in the reduced state at the bottleneck.
While achieving lower error forecast predictions, similar challenges apply to the U-Net and FNO surrogate models. It is unsurprising that U-Net and FNO are better at modeling high-frequency dynamics; the skip-connections that differentiate the U-Net and FCN help preserve spatial details, and the Fourier layers in FNOs transform a portion of the signal to Fourier space wherein linear operations serve as global integrators to capture non-local effects
[
41
,
25
]
. However, the relative smoothness of the predictions in figure
4
b would suggest that the U-Net and FNO surrogates suffer from a spectral bias. There exists a spectral bias in most neural networks, which prioritizes low-frequency features and commonly acts as a barrier to learning high-frequency components
[
38
]
. This is also consistent with the decreasing rate-of-change in error accumulation in figure
5
. As the high-frequency component decays with recursive predictions, the increase in error per time-step becomes dominated by a change in error for the predicted mean or periodic components of the velocity field towards which the models are biased.
Figure 6:
(a) Comparison of fluctuating, periodic, and mean component error. (b) Estimated planar turbulent kinetic energy in model forecast and measurements across time-steps.
As detailed in the methods section, a triple-decomposition was performed to isolate the fluctuating component of the velocity field, absent of the periodic and time-averaged component. The periodic component is approximated by projecting the velocity field onto the two most energetic modes found through POD
[
35
,
33
]
.
Figure
6
a shows the error of the fluctuating, periodic, and time-averaged components of the velocity field as a function of prediction step. Note that the errors are normalized by the magnitude of the free-stream velocity (rather than the norm of the field as in figure
5
). The error is dominated by that of the irregular velocity fluctuations. Further, the shape of the fluctuating component error with respect to time-step matches figure
5
very closely. This indicates that these unsteady fluctuations are the primary driver of error accumulation, likely due to spectral bias in the case of the neural network surrogates.
The fluctuating velocity component can be used to estimate the planar turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) in the predictions, as shown in figure
6
b as a function of the prediction time-step. Given that the experimental conditions were held constant and the time trajectories are not phase-aligned, the experimentally measured estimate for mean planar TKE is approximately constant across the forecast horizon, as represented by the red line. The standard deviation of the mean values is also plotted, but is occluded by the thickness of the line itself.
None of the surrogate models preserve the estimated planar TKE across the forecast horizon. The FCN surrogate model produces forecasts with greatly reduced TKE at the first time-step followed by only a small decay and ensuing plateau; this should be expected given the lack of high-frequency dynamics seen in figure
4
. The estimated planar TKE in U-Net and FNO surrogate predictions decays nonlinearly, with the most rapid decrease happening over the first few time-steps. The TKE in the U-Net surrogate model prediction appears to plateau at around the 25th time-step, indicating that it may indefinitely maintain considerably more TKE than the FCN surrogates. This must be attributable to the skip-layers that differentiate the two models, indicating that some preservation of spatial detail is critical in learning and maintaining energy in the fluctuating component of the velocity field.
While the DMD surrogate model results were qualitatively similar to those for U-Net and FNO in figures
4
,
5
, and
6
a, differences in the estimated planar TKE (figure
6
b) reflect fundamental differences between these model types. The prior figures indicate the same trends of progressive smoothing at higher time horizons for DMD as observed in the other models, which were explained for the other models by spectral biases. However, the DMD-based surrogate models are not neural networks, and therefore are not subject to spectral bias in the same sense. Rather, in DMD the most energetic modes are explicitly prioritized through the singular value decomposition used to compose these linear models. Instead, we turn to the estimated planar TKE for an explanation.
The decay in estimated planar TKE for the DMD surrogate model forecasts appears linear with more energy content than other model predictions across most of the prediction horizon. This linear decrease can be attributed to another interaction between experimental data and data-driven surrogate models; observation noise can result in underestimated eigenvalue magnitudes for the model, causing a deviation in growth or decay rates
[
7
,
17
]
. Given the presence of experimental noise and unobserved three-dimensional dynamics, the linear model predicts a small decrease in energy for each time-step which results in the linear decay seen across the forecast horizon in figure
6
b. As mentioned, this results in the DMD forecast velocity fields having the highest TKE for the majority of the time-steps shown; however, considering the error of the fluctuating component seen in figure
6
a, it is worth noting that this preservation of TKE does not result in an overall reduction in prediction error.
While the model performances vary, several trends emerge which are are relevant for more general surrogate model forecasting of experimental or real-world fluid flows. First, error tends to increase most rapidly over the first prediction time-steps. Figure
5
shows that the normalized error doubles for the best-performing model (U-Net) across the first ten time-steps. Qualitatively, this corresponds to spatially smoother and less energetic predictions which are attributable in-part to the inherent spectral bias of neural networks (when relevant). This can be exacerbated further by experimental noise and unobservable out-of-plane or sub-grid dynamics. Given an inadequately defined state observation, models cannot effectively learn to propagate the dynamics indefinitely, and instead produce smooth predictions with high-frequency features observed from the initial input decaying in time. While the practical utility of long-term predictions is highly context dependent, none of the models tested appear capable of accurately predicting or preserving the development and propagation of high-frequency velocity components for more than a few time-steps. Over shorter prediction horizons (e.g.,
<
5
<5
time-steps, approximately 1/6th of a vortex shedding cycle), however, we see that models appear to maintain some existing velocity fluctuation features in predictions despite the challenges associated with experimental measurements and limited observability.
III.2
Model performance across Reynolds numbers
Looking at a single Reynolds number, the relationship between flow physics and surrogate model performance has become more clear. Next we can examine how these dynamics change across Reynolds number. There exist multiple challenges associated with varying the Reynolds number in the context of modeling partially observed experimental velocity fields, which cannot be uncoupled. As the Reynolds number increases, turbulent fluctuations become more energetic and three-dimensional. Irregular out-of-plane velocity fluctuations at large Reynolds numbers are especially problematic; they cannot be measured with the planar two-component PIV, and they actively diminish the fidelity of in-plane measurements by moving seed particles in and out of the laser sheet. Out-of-plane motion of seed particles through the laser sheet results in reduced correlation between image pairs and more noise in the resulting velocity fields. As a result, increasing Reynolds number means more irregular fluctuations, more energy outside of the observable state, and noisier measurements.
To better understand how these characteristics impact the performance of data-driven surrogate models, separate models were trained on experimental datasets at seven Reynolds numbers ranging from
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
to
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
.
Figure 7:
Relationship between mean prediction error and Reynolds number for all models.
Figure
7
shows the mean prediction error as a function of the Reynolds number averaged across a ten time-step prediction horizon. It appears that the performance is most sensitive to Reynolds number from
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
to
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
for all four models, where there exists a rapid increase of error with respect to Reynolds number. The performance for all four model types changes more gradually at Reynolds numbers greater than
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
, with the error for FCN surrogates actually decreasing slightly between
R
​
e
=
1180
Re=1180
and
R
​
e
=
2370
Re=2370
. The challenges associated with data-driven modeling at increasing Reynolds number (e.g., turbulent fluctuations, out-of-plane velocities, energetic sub-grid eddies, experimental noise) do not appear to result in continually increasing error at
R
​
e
≥
830
Re\geq 830
.
Figure 8:
(a) Comparison of fluctuating, periodic, and mean component error. (b) Estimated planar turbulent kinetic energy in model forecast and measurements across Reynolds number.
Figure
8
a decomposes the error into the fluctuating, periodic, and time-averaged velocity components, normalized by the free-stream velocity. As in figure
6
a, the error is dominated by the fluctuating velocity component. While the trend with respect to Reynolds number seen in figure
8
a is similar to the trend seen in figure
7
, the U-Net, FNO, and DMD fluctuating velocity errors appear more sensitive to Reynolds number than the full field normalized error.
Figure
8
b shows the estimated planar TKE contained in the two-dimensional two-component velocity fluctuations for the measured field as well as model forecast predictions averaged across a ten time-step horizon. The surrogate models tend to underestimate the planar TKE, with the gap growing with increasing Reynolds number. This gap is largest across Reynolds numbers for FCN; based on observations regarding FCN performance in the previous section, it is unsurprising that it remains an outlier with much lower estimated planar TKE than the other models across the Reynolds numbers shown.
Notably, the predicted TKE for DMD forecasts is close to that of FNO and U-Net despite having markedly higher error in the fluctuating velocity component. As discussed in the previous section, DMD-based surrogate models explicitly include the highest energy modes. The decrease in TKE for the DMD surrogate model seen at
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
may be the result of increased experimental noise reducing the magnitude of eigenvalues further.
Figure 9:
Measured turbulence intensity in the cylinder wake at
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
,
R
​
e
=
1180
Re=1180
, and
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
, as well as the corresponding mean error fields for turbulence intensity in surrogate model forecasts. The error is calculated as the difference between the actual and predicted turbulence intensity fields. Positive error values suggest models tend to underestimate turbulence intensity.
Figure
9
provides physical insight into the error accumulated by showing the estimated turbulence intensity derived from the two-dimensional TKE, along with the error in turbulence intensity for models at three Reynolds numbers. Here the turbulence intensity was calculated from the turbulent kinetic energy averaged across the ten time-step forecast horizon for all candidates in the testing dataset. As expected from figure
8
b, the surrogate models tend to underestimate the turbulence intensity throughout the region of interest as indicated by the positive turbulence intensity error.
At the lowest Reynolds number shown (
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
), there is little error for U-Net, DMD, and FNO surrogate models, except at the leading portion of the shear layer surrounding the recirculation region. The FCN forecasts underestimate the turbulence intensity at this Reynolds number by a wider margin, even in the free-stream. This is consistent with the smooth predictions produced by FCN previously noted at
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
(figure
4
), which appears to continue even for the lower Reynolds number case shown here.
At the intermediate Reynolds number shown,
R
​
e
=
1180
Re=1180
, the models underestimate the turbulence intensity in the full length of shear layer surrounding the recirculation region. Again, the FCN predictions show the largest deviations in turbulence intensity, with the distribution of error closely following the shape of the measured turbulence intensity field. Given the characteristics of FCN surrogate model predictions previously observed, it is unsurprising that the turbulence intensity is underestimated throughout the field. The other two deep learning based surrogate models (U-Net and FNO) are similar with respect to the turbulence intensity error fields at
R
​
e
=
1180
Re=1180
, with error primarily accumulating near the vortex formation region. This can likely be attributed to velocity fluctuations during the vortex formation process and the resulting irregularly formed vortices, or even vortex dislocation events. While the turbulence intensity error field for DMD surrogate models appears to have similar magnitude to FNO and U-Net, it is more uniformly distributed throughout the region where vortices are formed and convect downstream. This distribution may be the result of the nature of DMD, where we would expect errors to accumulate from high-frequency, low energy transient features rather than primary vortex formation.
At the highest Reynolds number tested,
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
, experimental artifacts in the training data become apparent. Nearly vertical imperfections appear in the measured turbulence intensity, which can be attributed to uneven power distribution in the laser sheet arising from defects in the optical surface at the bottom of the test section. These artifacts become apparent at the highest Reynolds numbers in the dataset due to increased frame rate and subsequent reduced exposure time. The models do not predict the artifacts, which is why they appear as vertical lines in figure
9
. Looking past the artifacts, the comparative performance of the models is similar to the
R
​
e
=
1180
Re=1180
case. Notably, this is the only Reynolds number tested which lies firmly within the shear layer transition regime for oblique shedding
[
36
]
. The resulting instability can result in secondary vortices forming in the recirculation region, upstream of the primary vortex formation region. This may be the cause of the accumulated error observed between the shear layers upstream of the vortex formation region for all four models, where secondary streamwise vortices begin to form during the transition.
Figure 10:
Relationships between error, time-step, and Reynolds number for (a) U-Net, (b) FNO, (c) FCN, and (d) DMD models. On the left, the error is plotted as a function of prediction timestep across Reynolds number tested. On the right, the error at each timestep is plotted at individual time-steps.
The deaggregated error results across both forecast horizon and Reynolds number are shown in figure
10
. On the left of figure
10
, normalized error for each tested Reynolds number is plotted against time-step. On the right of figure
10
, the normalized error for each time-step is plotted against Reynolds number. Broadly, these results recapitulate the general trends observed in figures
5
and
7
. However, decomposing time-step and Reynolds number separately helps elucidate specific differences in model performance across the testing regime and provides insights into the physical mechanisms underlying error accumulation.
Focusing first on the left hand side of figure
10
provides important context regarding surrogate model performance across Reynolds numbers. For U-Net, FNO, and DMD-based surrogates, the lowest Reynolds number case (
R
​
e
=
230
Re=230
) is a clear outlier with comparatively lower absolute error and error rate of accumulation. Notably, looking at these same models, the maximum rate of change in error accumulation per time-step occurs at
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
. Although the error at the first time-step continues to increase for these models at higher Reynolds numbers, the error accumulated each at each additional time-step actually decreases. Consequently, the error at the tenth time-step for both U-Net and FNO approximately converge for all Reynolds numbers greater than
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
. A similar trend holds for DMD, with the error for the higher Reynolds numbers intersecting around the seventh time-step. At the tenth prediction step for DMD, the mean normalized error at
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
is higher than for
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
. This may indicate that the noisier data and resulting lower-magnitude eigenvalues actually decrease absolute error by producing less detailed predictions at even moderate forecast time horizons. The FCN models are distinct, with similarly high initial error for all but the lowest Reynolds number case, and only a small amount of additional error accumulated at each time-step. This is consistent with the smoothness and relatively high error signal observed in figure
4
.
The right side of figure
10
shows how the error at a given time-step varies across Reynolds numbers. With the exception of the FCN surrogates, it appears that error increases monotonically with Reynolds number at the first prediction steps. However, by the eighth time-step, the error reaches a clear plateau at
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
, similar to the trend seen in figure
7
. The FCN surrogate model predictions show a similar shape across all time-steps, where the error does not grow with Reynolds number beyond
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
.
The sensitivity to Reynolds number seen for the first time-step for U-Net, FNO, and DMD-based models is consistent with the observations in figure
8
b: as the Reynolds number increases, so too does the difference between measured and predicted TKE. For U-Net and FNO specifically, the increasing challenges associated with state observation (e.g., experimental noise, limited dimensionality of observations) and the inherent spectral bias of neural networks both lead to predictions with a reduction in high-frequency content when compared to the physical velocity fields. While these fluctuations become increasingly energetic with Reynolds number, the simultaneously more restrictive limitations in observability prevent the model from effectively learning the dynamics. Unable to propagate or forecast fine-scale dynamics, the surrogate models for
R
​
e
≥
830
Re\geq 830
collapse onto smooth predictions that minimize MSE. As a result, the first prediction step acts to truncate the high-frequency content and therefore appears most sensitive to Reynolds number. The subsequent time-steps lead to increasingly smooth predictions and less sensitivity to Reynolds number.
IV
Conclusion
In this work, we have analyzed an application of data-driven surrogate models for predicting experimentally measured fluid flows. These models have the potential for faster-than-real-time evaluation, possibly enabling real-world deployment for predictive model-based flow control. Common surrogate model architectures such as U-Net, FNO, DMD, and FCN were evaluated and their predictions analyzed in the context of observability limitations and increasingly complicated flow physics. The data-driven models were trained and evaluated on velocity fields measured in the near wake of a circular cylinder at a range of Reynolds numbers. The state observations were measured through two-dimensional, two-component PIV, which has limited resolution and explicitly excludes out-of-plane velocity components which are present throughout the range of Reynolds numbers tested.
We find that data-driven models are able to propagate low-frequency dynamics over long forecast horizons tested at
R
​
e
=
590
Re=590
, however fine high-frequency spatial details decay rapidly over the first several prediction time-steps. Through a triple decomposition, we established that the majority of the error comes from the high-frequency fluctuating velocity component. We see this in the decay of estimated planar TKE shown for all four models in figure
6
. Notably the linear DMD surrogate models, which require less data and fewer parameters, are able to maintain more energy in predictions across intermediate forecast horizons. While the goal of this work is not to provide a benchmark comparison between the models, we can also note that the highly generalized U-Net architecture achieved the lowest error in all metrics shown (with the exception of TKE magnitude) across the forecast horizon.
With respect to Reynolds number, we find the error across data-driven surrogates to have two distinct regimes, with mean forecast error being notably more sensitive to Reynolds number at
R
​
e
<
830
Re<830
than for
R
​
e
=
830
Re=830
to
R
​
e
=
2920
Re=2920
(figure
7
). This is attributable to a combination of factors, including the increasingly unsteady and turbulent dynamics which present a greater learning challenge, and the increase in measurement noise from the associated rising three-dimensional effects. However, rather than the growing challenge leading to a corresponding growth in error, the effective result is more relative smoothing in the predicted velocity fields. This smoothing effectively truncates high-frequency dynamics making the resulting error less sensitive to Reynolds number.
While the very presence of fluctuating three-dimensional dynamics implies that the two-dimensional, two-component velocity measurements used in training and testing are insufficient for fully observing the flow field, we found that models can still accurately predict the large-scale dynamics accurately across short time-horizons across all Reynolds numbers tested. Given the chaotic nature of the turbulent dynamics, it seems unlikely that any surrogate would be capable of accurately forecasting the development and evolution of secondary instabilities and finer scale flow features across moderate time horizons, although it remains possible that such a model may match the dynamics in a statistical sense.
We note that this work shows performance only of common data-driven models in baseline configurations; there are surely variants and modifications which could achieve superior prediction accuracy and help resolve some of the specific problems mentioned. For example, recently
Oommenn
et al.
[
32
]
demonstrated how generative models can help overcome spectral bias in neural networks for fluid mechanics. Additionally, physics-informed learning constraints could further enhance model performance
[
26
,
20
]
. However, data-driven losses must be approached carefully when working with experimental data; assumptions of divergence-free velocity fields, for example, would be invalid for models trained on the data presented in this work given the unknown out-of-plane velocity components.
This work represents a step towards applications of learning for the forecasting of real-world fluid mechanics. These data-driven models, in conjunction with real-time PIV systems
[
49
,
23
,
46
,
3
]
, could enable state-aware predictive flow control. While even two-component two-dimensional velocity field information is impractical in most real-world engineering applications, flow-field reconstruction from sparse measurements has been a focus of many recent works
[
4
,
6
,
27
,
9
,
10
,
8
,
29
]
. These reconstruction methods could be used directly in conjunction with the data-driven methods applied here to predict the future state of full-field data from a set of distributed sparse sensors.
V
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE‐1745301 and the Center for Autonomous Systems and Technologies at Caltech. The authors would also like to thank Alejandro Stefan Zavala for helpful discussions.
VI
Author Contributions
P.R. and M.G. conceptualized this work. P.R. and C.W. collected the data for this work. P.R. developed and ran models. E.P. and P.R. analyzed data and generated visualizations. P.R. drafted manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited. M.G. supervised.
Appendix A
Hyperparameter and Additional Figures
Table 2:
FCN Hyperparameters
Initial learning rate
10
−
3
10^{-3}
Max epochs
200
Batch size
32
Train set size
3488
Test set size
832
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning rate scheduler
CosineAnnealingLR w/ warmup
Learning rate scheduler warmup epochs
5
Weight decay
10
−
4
10^{-4}
Gradient clipping
0.50
Early stopping patience
30
Early stopping tolerance
99%
Filter size
5
Dropout rate
0.2
Total number of parameter
63M
Table 3:
U-Net Hyperparameters
Initial learning rate
10
−
3
10^{-3}
Max epochs
200
Batch size
32
Train set size
3488
Test set size
832
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning rate scheduler
CosineAnnealingLR w/ warmup
Learning rate scheduler warmup epochs
5
Weight decay
10
−
4
10^{-4}
Gradient clipping
0.50
Early stopping patience
30
Early stopping tolerance
99%
Filter size
5
Dropout rate
0.2
Total number of parameter
58M
Table 4:
FNO Hyperparameters
Initial learning rate
10
−
3
10^{-3}
Max epochs
200
Batch size
32
Train set size
3488
Test set size
832
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning rate scheduler
CosineAnnealingLR w/ warmup
Learning rate scheduler warmup epochs
5
Weight decay
10
−
4
10^{-4}
Gradient clipping
0.50
Early stopping patience
30
Early stopping tolerance
99%
Fourier layer width
80
Fourier layer modes
24
Total number of parameter
59M
Figure 11:
Relationship between error and time-step for models with and without a time-delay embedding.
References
[1]
F. Achermann, T. Stastny, B. Danciu, A. Kolobov, J. J. Chung, R. Siegwart, and N. Lawrance
(2024)
WindSeer: real-time volumetric wind prediction over complex terrain aboard a small uncrewed aerial vehicle
.
Nature Communications
15
(
1
),
pp. 3507
.
Cited by:
§II.3
.
[2]
G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley
(1993)
The proper orthogonal decomposition in the analysis of turbulent flows
.
Annual Rev. Fluid Mech.
.
Cited by:
§II.2
.
[3]
S. A. Bollt, S. H. Foxman, and M. Gharib
(2025)
RapidPIV: full flow-field khz piv for real-time display and control
.
Measurement Science and Technology
36
(
10
),
pp. 105116
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[4]
I. Bright, G. Lin, and J. N. Kutz
(2013)
Compressive sensing based machine learning strategy for characterizing the flow around a cylinder with limited pressure measurements
.
Physics of Fluids
25
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[5]
S. L. Brunton, B. R. Noack, and P. Koumoutsakos
(2020)
Machine learning for fluid mechanics
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[6]
J. L. Callaham, K. Maeda, and S. L. Brunton
(2019)
Robust flow reconstruction from limited measurements via sparse representation
.
Physical Review Fluids
4
(
10
),
pp. 103907
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[7]
D. Duke, J. Soria, and D. Honnery
(2012)
An error analysis of the dynamic mode decomposition
.
Experiments in fluids
52
(
2
),
pp. 529–542
.
Cited by:
§III.1
.
[8]
N. B. Erichson, L. Mathelin, Z. Yao, S. L. Brunton, M. W. Mahoney, and J. N. Kutz
(2020)
Shallow neural networks for fluid flow reconstruction with limited sensors
.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A
476
(
2238
),
pp. 20200097
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[9]
K. Fukami, B. An, M. Nohmi, M. Obuchi, and K. Taira
(2022)
Machine-learning-based reconstruction of turbulent vortices from sparse pressure sensors in a pump sump
.
Journal of Fluids Engineering
144
(
12
),
pp. 121501
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[10]
K. Fukami, R. Maulik, N. Ramachandra, K. Fukagata, and K. Taira
(2021)
Global field reconstruction from sparse sensors with voronoi tessellation-assisted deep learning
.
Nature Machine Intelligence
3
(
11
),
pp. 945–951
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[11]
K. Fukami, T. Murata, K. Zhang, and K. Fukagata
(2021)
Identification of nonlinear dynamics with low-dimensionalized flow representations
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
926
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[12]
M. Hammache and M. Gharib
(1991)
An experimental study of the parallel and oblique vortex shedding from circular cylinders
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
232
,
pp. 567–590
.
Cited by:
§II.1.1
.
[13]
R. Han, X. Yang, and W. Liu
(2025)
Unsteady flow prediction based on a hybrid network-operator learning model
.
Physics of Fluids
37
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[14]
K. Hasegawa, K. Fukami, T. Murata, and K. Fukagata
(2020)
CNN-lstm based reduced order modeling of two-dimensional unsteady flows around a circular cylinder at different reynolds numbers
.
Fluid Dynamics Research
52
.
Cited by:
§II.1
.
[15]
K. Hasegawa, K. Fukami, T. Murata, and K. Fukagata
(2020)
Machine-learning-based reduced-order modeling for unsteady flows around bluff bodies of various shapes
.
Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics
34
.
Cited by:
§II.1
.
[16]
P. Héas and C. Herzet
(2022)
Low-rank dynamic mode decomposition: an exact and tractable solution
.
Journal of Nonlinear Science
32
(
1
),
pp. 8
.
Cited by:
§II.3.4
.
[17]
M. S. Hemati, C. W. Rowley, E. A. Deem, and L. N. Cattafesta
(2017)
De-biasing the dynamic mode decomposition for applied koopman spectral analysis of noisy datasets
.
Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics
31
(
4
),
pp. 349–368
.
Cited by:
§III.1
.
[18]
S. M. Ichinaga, F. Andreuzzi, N. Demo, M. Tezzele, K. Lapo, G. Rozza, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz
(2024)
PyDMD: a python package for robust dynamic mode decomposition
.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
25
(
417
),
pp. 1–9
.
Cited by:
§II.3.4
.
[19]
D. Jeon and M. Gharib
(2004)
On the relationship between the vortex formation process and cylinder wake vortex patterns
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
.
Cited by:
§II.1.1
.
[20]
G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and L. Yang
(2021)
Physics-informed machine learning
.
Nature Reviews Physics
3
(
6
),
pp. 422–440
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[21]
N. Kovachki, S. Lanthaler, and S. Mishra
(2021)
On universal approximation and error bounds for fourier neural operators
.
Journal of Machine Learning Research
.
Cited by:
§II.3.3
.
[22]
N. Kovachki, Z. Li, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar
(2022)
Neural operator: learning maps between function spaces
.
Journal of Machine Learning Research (to appear, on Arxiv)
.
Cited by:
§II.3.3
.
[23]
M. Kreizer, D. Ratner, and A. Liberzon
(2010)
Real-time image processing for particle tracking velocimetry
.
Experiments in fluids
48
(
1
),
pp. 105–110
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[24]
Z. Li, W. Peng, Z. Yuan, and J. Wang
(2023)
Long-term predictions of turbulence by implicit u-net enhanced fourier neural operator
.
Physics of Fluids
35
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[25]
Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar
(2021)
Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations
.
ICLR
.
Cited by:
§I
,
§II.3.3
,
§III.1
.
[26]
Z. Li, H. Zheng, N. Kovachki, D. Jin, H. Chen, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, and A. Anandkumar
(2021)
Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial differential equations
.
arXiv:2111.03794
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[27]
J. Loiseau, B. R. Noack, and S. L. Brunton
(2018)
Sparse reduced-order modelling: sensor-based dynamics to full-state estimation
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
844
,
pp. 459–490
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[28]
J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell
(2015)
Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation
.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
,
pp. 3431–3440
.
Cited by:
§II.3.1
.
[29]
K. H. Manohar, C. Morton, and P. Ziadé
(2022)
Sparse sensor-based cylinder flow estimation using artificial neural networks
.
Physical Review Fluids
7
(
2
),
pp. 024707
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[30]
M. Moriomoto, K. Fukami, K. Zhang, and K. Fukagata
(2021)
Generalization techniques of neural networks for fluid flow estimation
.
Neural Computing and Applications
34
.
Cited by:
§II.1
.
[31]
T. Nakamura, K. Fukami, and K. Hasegawa
(2021)
Convolutional neural network and long short-term memory based reduced order surrogate for minimal turbulent channel flow
.
Physics of Fluids
33
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[32]
V. Oommenn, S. Kohdakarami, A. Bora, Z. Wang, and G. E. Karniadakis
(2026)
Learning turbulent flows with generative models for super resolution and sparse flow reconstruction
.
Nature Communications
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[33]
B. v. Oudheusden, F. Scarano, N. v. Hinsberg, and D. Watt
(2005)
Phase-resolved characterization of vortex shedding in the near wake of a square-section cylinder at incidence
.
Experiments in fluids
39
(
1
),
pp. 86–98
.
Cited by:
§II.2
,
§III.1
.
[34]
S. Pan and K. Duraisamy
(2020)
On the structure of time-delay embedding in linear models of non-linear dynamical systems
.
Chaos
.
Cited by:
§II.3
.
[35]
R. Perrin, M. Braza, E. Cid, S. Cazin, A. Barthet, A. Sevrain, C. Mockett, and F. Thiele
(2007)
Obtaining phase averaged turbulence properties in the near wake of a circular cylinder at high reynolds number using pod
.
Experiments in Fluids
43
(
2
),
pp. 341–355
.
Cited by:
§II.2
,
§III.1
.
[36]
A. Prasad and C. H. Williamson
(1997)
The instability of the shear layer separating from a bluff body
.
Journal of fluid mechanics
333
,
pp. 375–402
.
Cited by:
§II.1.1
,
§III.2
.
[37]
A. Prasad and C. H. Williamson
(1997)
Three-dimensional effects in turbulent bluff-body wakes
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
343
,
pp. 235–265
.
Cited by:
§II.1.1
.
[38]
N. Rahaman, A. Baratin, D. Arpit, F. Draxler, M. Lin, F. Hamprecht, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville
(2019)
On the spectral bias of neural networks
.
In
International conference on machine learning
,
pp. 5301–5310
.
Cited by:
§III.1
.
[39]
P. I. Renn, E. H. Palmer, and M. Gharib
(2026)
Experimental dataset of turbulent cylinder wake velocity fields for deep learning
.
Scientific Data
.
Cited by:
§II.1.1
.
[40]
W.C. Reynolds and A.K.M.F. Hussain
(1971)
The mechanics of an organized wave in turbulent shear flow. part 3. theoretical models and comparisons with experiments
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
.
Cited by:
§II.2
.
[41]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox
(2015)
U-net: convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation
.
In
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention
,
Cited by:
§II.3.2
,
§III.1
.
[42]
A. Roshko
(1958)
Report 1191: on the development of turbulent wakes from vortex streets
.
Technical report
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics
.
Cited by:
§II.1
.
[43]
P. J. Schmid
(2010)
Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data
.
Journal of fluid mechanics
656
,
pp. 5–28
.
Cited by:
§II.3.4
.
[44]
P. J. Schmid
(2022)
Dynamic mode decomposition and its variants
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
54
(
1
),
pp. 225–254
.
Cited by:
§II.3
.
[45]
P.A. Srinivasan, L. Guastoni, H. Azizpour, P. Schlatter, and R. Vinuesa
(2019)
Predictions of turbulent shear flows using deep neural networks
.
Physical Review Fluids
4
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[46]
E. Varon, J. Aider, Y. Eulalie, S. Edwige, and P. Gilotte
(2019)
Adaptive control of the dynamics of a fully turbulent bimodal wake using real-time piv
.
Experiments in Fluids
60
(
8
),
pp. 1–21
.
Cited by:
§IV
.
[47]
R. Wang, K. Kashinath, M. Mustafa, A. Albert, and R. Yu
(2020)
Towards physics-informed deep learning for turbulent flow prediction
.
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[48]
G. Wen, Z. Li, K. Azizzadenesheli, A. Anandkumar, and S. M. Benson
(2022)
U-fno—an enhanced fourier neural operator-based deep-learning model for multiphase flow
.
Advances in Water Resources
163
.
Cited by:
§I
.
[49]
C. Willert, M. Munson, and M. Gharib
(2010)
Real-time particle image velocimetry for closed-loop flow control applications
.
In
Conference proceedings
,
Cited by:
§IV
.
[50]
C.H.K. Williamson
(1996)
Three-dimensional wake transition
.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics
.
Cited by:
§II.1
.
[51]
C.H.K. Williamson
(1996)
Vortex dynamics in the cylinder wake
.
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics
.
Cited by:
§I
,
§II.1.1
,
§II.1
.
[52]
P. L. Wu, H. S. Gao, Q. Wang, and P. Y. Wang
(2022)
A novel forecast framework for unsteady flows based on a convolutional neural network
.
Physics of Fluids
34
.
Cited by:
§I
.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
      support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
      methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue"
(
)
button, located in the page header.
Tip:
You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified
the following issues
. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
      may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
      should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
      all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a
list of packages that need conversion
, and welcome
developer contributions
.
BETA